Stable Survival Extrapolation via Transfer Learning
Anastasios Apsemidisa∗and Nikolaos Demirisb
a∗Department of Statistics, Athens University of Economics and Business, Athens,
Greece, apsemidis@aueb.gr
bDepartment of Statistics, Athens University of Economics and Business, Athens, Greece,
nikos@aueb.gr
Abstract
The mean survival is the key ingredient of the decision process in several appli-
cations, notably in health economic evaluations. It is defined as the area under the
complete survival curve, thus necessitating extrapolation of the observed data. This
may be achieved in a more stable manner by borrowing long term evidence from reg-
istry and demographic data. Such borrowing can be seen as an implicit bias-variance
trade-off in unseen data. In this article we employ a Bayesian mortality model and
transfer its projections in order to construct the baseline population that acts as an
anchor of the survival model. We then propose extrapolation methods based on flex-
ible parametric polyhazard models which can naturally accommodate diverse shapes,
including non-proportional hazards and crossing survival curves, while typically main-
taining a natural interpretation. We estimate the mean survival and related estimands
in three cases, namely breast cancer, cardiac arrhythmia and advanced melanoma.
Specifically, we evaluate the survival disadvantage of triple-negative breast cancer
cases, the efficacy of combining immunotherapy with mRNA cancer therapeutics for
melanoma treatment and the suitability of implantable cardioverter defibrilators for
cardiac arrhythmia. The latter is conducted in a competing risks context illustrating
how working on the cause-specific hazard alone minimizes potential instability. The
results suggest that the proposed approach offers a flexible, interpretable and robust
approach when survival extrapolation is required.
Keywords: Survival analysis; Bayesian; Poly-hazard models; Cancer; mRNA vaccine; Com-
peting risks.
1
arXiv:2409.16044v2  [stat.AP]  22 Nov 2024
1
Introduction
Extrapolation beyond the observed survival curve can be dangerous and should not be
made casually. However, practical applications necessitate such extrapolation, especially
in health economic modeling and related applications of survival analysis. This is sometimes
performed by fitting naive parametric models and simply projecting them to the future.
Alternatively, solutions based upon the restricted mean survival (RMS) have been proposed,
but from the health economic perspective these give an accurate answer to the wrong
problem.
In this paper we proposed an alternative approach building on flexible parametric sur-
vival models. We integrate several data sources from registries and population mortality
along with clinical data in order to produce robust estimates of the required estimands.
We proceed by incorporating mortality projections thus creating the timely stable anchor
upon which extrapolation may be based. We then utilise flexible polyhazard parametric
models which seamlessly incorporate the complex nature of time-to-event data, including
cause-specific data and crossing survival curves.
Anchoring against external data has been recognised as a way to build towards robust
ways of extrapolation to the future (see Rutherford et al. 2020), either from a Bayesian
perspective (e.g.
Demiris and Sharples 2006) or using a frequentist approach.
This is
essentially being proposed because it offers an implicit bias-variance trade-off in the unseen
data since utilising long term information minimises the chance of wild extrapolation, albeit
with the possibility of adding bias.
Since this trade-off is concerned with future data,
this represents a non-standard statistical problem. See Jackson et al. (2017), Bullement
et al. (2023) and Latimer and Adler (2022) for recent reviews on survival extrapolation
by anchoring against external data. In some recent developments, Gallacher et al. (2021)
2
discuss problems regarding the goodness-of-fit statistics to select a model for extrapolation,
while Che et al. (2023) present a method that gradually blends the predicted survival of
the disease population with the survival of the general population. Guyot et al. (2017) use
splines to extrapolate survival of cancer patients, while the practicality of adopting this
line of research has improved substantially by the approach of Jackson (2023) who provides
an R package for flexible and practical extrapolation using M-splines.
One aspect of all these methods relates to the fact that the survival curve of the ex-
ternal population is based on past information of mortality.
Thus, when creating the
survival profile of a ‘synthetic’ 60 year old woman, say, this effectively does not reflect the
life expectancy of a concurrent individual. In this paper we adopt a different approach
and use mortality projections for the external population, thus using an updated profile
that appears more suitable for contemporary calculations. We then combine the external
projections with richly parametric models of the poly-hazard type and capitalise on their
statistical efficiency and interpretability.
Our methodology is motivated from and tested on three case studies regarding breast
cancer, metastatic skin melanoma and cardiac arrhythmia. The breast cancer dataset con-
tains long follow up and therefore facilitates the thorough assessment of the predictive
ability of the proposed approach based on suitable information fractions. We use individ-
ual information on particular genes to classify individuals as triple negative or not and
evaluate their life expectancy in a challenging scenario of crossing survival curves. The
current developments regarding mRNA therapeutics is tackled in melanoma where we esti-
mate the advantage when the mRNA vaccine is received along with pembrolizumab versus
those receiving pembrolizumab immunotherapy alone.
Our third use case is concerned
with an arrhythmia dataset where we estimate the LYG for patients that receive an im-
3
plantable cardioverter defibrilator (ICD) compared to a group receiving anti arrhythmia
drugs (AAD). In doing so, we extend the poly-hazard models with the introduction of
suitable change-points. The implementation of proposed methods has been carried out in
the R language and the relevant Stan code is made freely available on Github.
The remaining of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the three case-
studies that motivated our work where survival extrapolation is of paramount importance.
Section 3 describes the methodology proposed for achieving this, while Section 4 summarises
the results. Section 5 concludes with a discussion and ideas for future research.
2
Motivating Problems
Here we describe the three medical applications that drive our interest in creating the class
of extrapolation methods developed in this paper.
2.1
Breast Cancer
Breast cancer is the most common cancer indication in women in 157 out of 185 countries
according to 2022 data by World Health Organization. Therefore, accurate estimates of
their survival profile is of great interest. This is true for the general cases but also for
particular sub-types (e.g. Coles et al. 2024) that are increasingly of interest in ‘precision
medicine’. Three types of genes are known to play a significant role in the survival of
such patients, ER, PR and HER2. Patients with negative status in all three are typically
termed ‘triple negative’ and have a poor prognosis so their study as a group of special
interest is of paramount importance (see Abraham et al. 2024 for example). We focus on
the METABRIC breast cancer dataset (Curtis et al. 2012) which is available at cBioPortal
and include genomic and clinical data of patients from Canada and the United Kingdom
4
(UK).
2.2
Advanced Melanoma
Melanoma refers to a type of skin cancer at metastatic stage. Their treatment has been
revolutionalized due to immunotherapy such as pembrolizumab; see Villani et al. (2022) for
a discussion of the currently available treatment options. Perhaps the most exciting new
cancer treatment is based on mRNA technology and a number of clinical trials are currently
being deployed, mostly on patients with resected melanoma at high risk of recurrence and is
being used as an adjuvant therapy in combination with adjuvant pembrolizumab. Khattak
et al. (2023) have published the first such trial where the hazard ratio for recurrence-free
survival was 0.561 for patients receiving ‘mRNA-4157 (V940) + pembro’ against pembro
alone, while no estimates for overall survival were reported. Preliminary survival estimates
of these groups are thus desirable. We digitize the published survival curve (see the on-line
Appendix A) from Hamid et al. (2019) to obtain event times of patients receiving pembro.
We then use the estimated hazard ratio as the basis for the ‘mRNA+pembro’ curve. In
the on-line Appendix F, we gather the results from a more recent clinical trial (Robert et
al. 2023).
2.3
Cardiac Arrhythmia
Cardiac arrhythmia refers to problems regarding the rate of the heartbeat. Survivors of
ventricular fibrillation receive AAD treatment to control the disease, but ICD was shown
to be more efficient (see Connolly et al. 2000). We aim to estimate the LYG among pa-
tients on AAD or with ICD in a cause-specific hazards setting. We digitized the published
Kaplan-Meier curve from Demiris and Sharples (2006) and use the meta-analysis of Con-
5
nolly et al. (2000) who report a hazard ratio hICD/hAAD = 0.5 with 95% C.I. (0.37, 0.67) for
arrhythmia-related deaths, see also Buxton et al. (2006). The ‘death due to other causes’
component is common in both groups and the external population thus minimizes the risk
of unstable extrapolation.
3
Extrapolation using mortality projections
3.1
Polyhazard models
Here we define the building block of our approach, a flexible parametric survival model.
Let us set the notation and denote by h(t) := lim
h→0
P(t ≤T < t + h | T ≥t)
h
the hazard at
time t and S(t) the survival function. Then, given data (ti, δi), i = 1, . . . , n with ti the
observed time and δi the corresponding indicator of either event or censoring, the likelihood
function reads L = Qn
i=1 S(ti)h(ti)δi. The proposed models are best modeled and assessed
at the hazard scale. We build on their empirical estimates and in addition to the Kaplan-
Meier estimator (Kaplan and Meier 1958) we use empirical hazard estimates, e.g. Muller
and Wang (1994) and Gefeller and Dette (1992). Poly-hazard models (see for instance
Louzada-Neto 1999 and Demiris et al. 2015) postulate that the hazard function h(·) can
be decomposed as a sum of M components: h(t) = PM
m=1 hm(t).
We define a joint model for the external and disease population, both of which are
assigned a poly-hazard process.
We denote by hd(t) = PM
m=1 hm
d (t) the hazard of the
disease group and hp(t) = PM
m=1 dm
p (t) the hazard of the external population data and
assume that some of their components are either identical or proportional to each other. A
selection that worked well in our case studies uses M = 3, h1
d(t) = C·h1
p(t) and h3
d(t) = h3
p(t).
6
Finally, the likelihood contributions from the two datasets are
Ld =
nd
Y
i=1
hd(ti)δiSd(ti)
and
(1)
Lp =
np
Y
j=1
hp(tj)δjSp(tj)
(2)
for samples of size nd and np respectively, composing the total likelihood
L = Ld · Lp
(3)
Selecting the parametric form of each hazard component represents a model deter-
mination issue. The Weibull family has been used extensively due to its combination of
tractability and flexibility, including increasing, constant and decreasing hazards. Thus, the
poly-Weibull model can result in the commonly observed bathtub (or U-shaped) hazard,
in contrast to mixtures of Weibull densities (Glaser 1980).
The Log-Normal and Log-
Logistic-based hazards can be either decreasing or unimodal and thus capable of producing
an upside-down U-shaped hazard. They also represent resonable options for increasing com-
ponents since the maximum may be reached far beyond the observed time period. Note
that there is no restriction in using single-family components and mixing is recommended
if inspection of the empirical hazard suggests this.
3.1.1
Polyhazard models with change-points
One may add flexibility by incorporating change-points to the hazard rate, e.g. Friedman
(1982) or Casellas (2007). We extend this approach to the polyhazard case. Suppose there
exist K fixed change-points in time τ0:K−1, where the total hazard adopts a different form
of a polyhazard model with parameters θk, i.e.
h(t; θ) = h(t; θk)I
 t ∈(τk−1, τk)

, for
instance a Bi-Weibull form hW(t; α1, λ1) + hW(t; α2, λ2) in the interval (τ0, τ1 −1) and a
Tri-LogNormal form hLN(t; µ1, σ1) + hLN(t; µ2, σ2) + hLN(t; µ3, σ3) in the (τ1, τ2) interval,
7
where τ0 = 0 and τ2 = maxi{tt1,...,tn}. Then, the survival function may be written as
S(t; θ) =

























S(t; θ1)
,
0 ≤t < τ1
S(τ1; θ1)S(t; θ2)/S(τ1; θ2)
,
τ1 ≤t < τ2
...
S(τ1; θ1)S(τ2; θ2)
S(τ1; θ2) · ... ·
S(t; θK)
S(τK−1; θK),
τK−1 ≤t ≤τK
or compactly as S(t; θ) = S(t; θJ)
QJ−1
j=1 S(τj; θj)
QJ−1
j=1 S(τj; θj+1)
I
 t ∈(τJ−1, τJ)

, i.e.
appropriately
adjusting the survival function at each change-point.
The likelihood still reads L =
Qn
i=1 h(ti; θ)δiS(ti; θ) using the amended hazard and survival functions. An alternative
way to visualize this formula is by denoting with s
 (a, b)

the survival of a patient inside
the interval (a, b). Then the survival function reads S(t) = s
 (0, τ1)

s
 (τ1, τ2)

...s
 (t, τK)

where each patient may reach time t after surviving each interval of length τ1, τ2 −τ1, ...,
τK −t with parameters θ1, θ2, ..., θK respectively.
3.2
Construction of the external population via mortality pro-
jections
Several authors argued that projecting survival beyond the last observed time t∗should
anchor against external long-term evidence.
This makes intuitive sense since the long-
term data facilitate adding stability and may prevent wild extrapolations. Such external
survival data have typically been based on past survival information as opposed to current
estimates of life expectancy. We amend this issue by adopting projections of the mortality
rate, thus creating estimates of the current life expectancy for the external data. In this
paper these projections are based on the Lee-Carter model (Lee and Carter 1992) but
alternative models may be used. Denote by yx,t the log-mortality rates for age x and time
8
t and write
yx,t = αx + βxκt + ϵx,t
κt = u + κt−1 + vt
where ϵx,t ∼N(0, σ2
ϵ) and vt ∼N(0, σ2
v). We follow the Bayesian approach of Pedroza
(2006) and project the mortality t′mx for age x at a future time t′. The probability of
reaching age x + j from age x is estimated as
t′πx+j
x
= exp[−
j−1
X
i=0
t′mx+i]
thus providing an estimate of the survival probability for the external population at the
desired time. For instance, the probability a 20-year-old survives until the age of 22 in
2024 is estimated as 2024π22
20 = exp[−2024m20 −2024m21].
Using this approach one may
create synthetic times until death from the external population provided it has been age-
sex matched with the demographic characteristics of the clinical data. The mortality data
can be obtained from the Human Mortality Database. For example, we downloaded UK
mortality rates for ages 0-110 of years 2000-2020, we projected until 2023 and we utilized
the published proportions of arrhythmia-related deaths at each age in order to generate
the synthesized data as in Benaglia et al. (2015).
3.3
Extrapolation methods
The building block for moving beyond the observed time horizon is the joint poly-hazard
model and the corresponding estimates of the two total hazards, for the disease group,
hd(t; θd), and for the general population hp(t; θp). We proceed by proposing two methods for
obtaining the required extrapolated curves. The basic method projects hd(t; θd) using the
estimated parameters ˆθd. Note this approach implicitly uses the external information via
9
its dependence on the components of hp retaining the required robustness. An alternative
approach for extrapolating hd is postulating that at the end of the follow-up period the
relationship between hd and hp remains unchanged in some form. Specifically, one may
assume an additive relation and calculate the last k differences between hd and hp, use
the average, say D =
1
k
Pk
i=1 hd(tnd−i+1) −hp(tnd−i+1) and utilise hd(t′) = D + hp(t′).
Alternatively, a multiplicative relation may be employed through a (constant) hazard ratio
R = 1
k
Pk
i=1 hp(tnd−i+1)/hp(tnd−i+1), so that hd(t′) = R · hp(t′).
The individual components of the poly-hazard models may or may not have a natural
interpretation. However, one can naturally think of the component that induces high hazard
at the start of follow-up as associated with the disease of interest and the component that
increases as the one capturing the aging/long term effects. In that case one may apply
the constant difference/ratio method for the component of interest alone and then add the
extrapolated components to obtain the total hazard in this pseudo-cause-specific hazard
scenario. In the Appendix we give examples illustrating each proposed method termed
‘baseline’, ‘constant difference’, ‘constant ratio’, ‘pseudo cause specific constant difference’
and ‘pseudo cause specific constant ratio’.
3.4
Cause-specific hazards
In the presence of cause-specific evidence one may resort to cause-specific hazards as follows,
see also Benaglia et al. 2015. Assume that the external population hazard consists of two
components from the same family of distributions, one of which relates to the cause of
interest and the other refers to all other causes. For component k = 1, 2 we have failure
times tk
i and their corresponding censoring indicator δk
i , i = 1, ..., nk and the likelihood
contribution of the ‘cause of interest’ and ‘other causes’ is Lk
p = Qnk
i=1 hk
p(tk
i )δk
i Sk
p(tk
i ) whence
10
the total hazard reads hp = h1
p + h2
p. This decomposition means that the hazard of death
from ‘other causes’ may reasonably be assumed to be common. This facilitates for stable
extrapolation since one then needs only to model the cause-specific hazard. Assuming it is
proportional to the hazard of the external population we get
hd(t) = C · h1
p(t) + h2
p(t)
and the likelihood reads Ls = Qn
i=1 hd(ti)δiSd(ti).
The joint likelihood of the external
population and the disease group is then L = Ls · L1
p · L2
p.
3.5
Mean survival and life years gained
The mean survival is defined as the area under the complete survival curve. The RMS is
given by the area under the survival curve from time t = 0 until the end of follow-up period
and this can be very far from the true mean survival in specific applications such trials
without extensive follow-up or diseases with low mortality. Once the complete survival
curve has been estimated one may derive the mean survival using, say, the trapezoidal rule
Z tmax
0
S(t)dt ≈
N
X
z=1
S(tz−1) + S(tz)
2
(tz −tz−1)
(4)
where tmax is the maximum time point when survival probability is effectively zero and
{tz | z = 0, ..., N} is a partition of the interval (0, tmax) with t0 = 0 and tmax = tN. The
LYG between the survival functions S1(·) and S2(·) can then be estimated as
LY GS1,S2 =
Z tmax
0
S1(t)dt −
Z tmax
0
S2(t)dt
(5)
where tmax = max{t1
max, t2
max}.
11
3.6
Priors and Computation
We use the NUTS (Hoffman and Gelman 2014) version of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo as
implemented in the Stan probabilistic programming language. We found it has been suf-
ficiently fast and therefore resorting to other approximations such as variational inference
appeared unnecessary. We list here the prior densities assigned to the main parameters.
For the shape parameters of the poly-hazard models we use Exponential priors with mean
10 and for the rate parameters we use Gamma(2,0.5) priors. The proportionality constant
between components of the external population and the disease group was also assigned
an Exponential prior density. For the poly-LogNormal models we use Gaussian N(0, 52)
priors for the location parameters.
4
Experiments
The poly-Weibull model has been our baseline approach due to its flexibility, interpretability
and fidelity to the data. Poly-LogNormal and poly-LogLogistic models have also been used
achieving generally worse or comparable fit. Two or three hazard components have been
proven sufficient in all our applications, irrespective of the selected hazard form. Here
we outline the main results while additional findings are in Appendix C for the external
population mortality projections, in Appendix D for the triple-negative and non-triple-
negative groups of breast cancer and in Appendices E, F and G for the breast cancer,
melanoma and arrhythmia data respectively.
12
Figure 1: Extrapolated survival function (left) and hazard function (right) when keeping
only 80% of fractional information for the breast cancer data. The breast cancer follow-
up is indicated as ‘BC’ in solid line and its extrapolation (‘BCextr’) in dashed line. The
external population is indicated with a dot-dashed line and the empirical estimation (the
KM in the survival case) as a dotted line.
4.1
Breast Cancer
The breast cancer dataset has long follow up and hence a nearly complete survival curve,
thus facilitating repeated testing of the trained models against the ‘truth’ in the form of
the observed data. We use various levels of the information fraction (Demets and Lan
1994) as a metric. For example, 80% of information corresponds to 49% survival proba-
bility. The best model for this dataset was a joint Bi-Weibull for the disease group and
the external population. We impose the constraint that the first components of each Bi-
Weibull model will be proportional to each other and the second components will be equal.
Thus, we generate age-sex matched data from the external population y1:np and we assume
each sample i = 1, ..., np has hazard hp(yi; α1, α2, λ1, λ2) = h1
p(yi; α1, λ1) + h2
p(yi; α2, λ2).
The hazard form of each component m is Weibull with shape and rate parameters αm
and λm respectively, i.e.
hm
p (yi; αm, λm) = λm · αm · yαm−1
i
.
The survival function is
13
S(yi; α1, α2, λ1, λ2) = S1
p(yi; α1, λ1) · S2
p(yi; α1, λ1), where each component takes the form
Sm
p (yi; αm, λm) = exp(−λm · yαm
i
). The likelihood is given by equation (2). For the disease
data t1:nd, we also assume a Bi-Weibull model, but every sample i = 1, ..., nd has hazard
hd(ti; α1, α2, λ1, λ2) = C · h1
p(ti; α1, λ1) + h2
p(ti; α2, λ2) and survival S(ti; α1, α2, λ1, λ2) =
S1
p(ti; α1, λ1)C · S2
p(ti; α1, λ1), where C > 0. The likelihood is given by (1) and the complete
likelihood by (3).
The extrapolated survival and hazard functions are depicted in Figure 1. In this exam-
ple the five extrapolation methods give similar results and we present the baseline method
which in this case coincides with the pseudo cause-specific constant ratio method (by con-
struction, see Appendix B). Thus, we use hd(t′
i; ˆα1, ˆλ1, ˆα2, ˆλ2) for each new point t′
i. Using
equations (4) and (5), we estimate a mean survival of approximately 180 months in com-
parison to the external mean survival of approximately 302 months, i.e. 122 life months
lost on average due to cancer. The other extrapolation methods give similar results, ex-
cept of the constant ratio method estimating approximately 173 months of mean survival,
slightly closer to 168, the Kaplan-Meier-based estimate. However, due to a small sample
at the the of the follow-up we tend to believe the aforementioned model more than the
non-parametric estimate of the KM.
4.1.1
Subgroup Analysis for precision medicine
In the same dataset the status of the three genes ER, PR and HER2 are available, so we
construct the groups 3N (negative to all three) and n3N (at least one positive) and try to
estimate the mean survival time of each group. The 3N group is known to have a worse
prognosis and such sub-grouping is becoming increasingly important in precision medicine.
These two groups for the present dataset result in crossing survival curves (Figure 2) and
therefore non-proportional hazards, a challenging modelling task. However, we apply the
14
Table 1: Information criteria for the 3N group. Model 1 is an Exponential-Weibull-Weibull
for the three parts, while Model 2 is a Bi-Weibull in each part. The results are rounded to
2 decimal digits. DIC2 is the DIC version that uses the variance of the log-likelihood.
AIC
BIC
DIC
DIC2
WAIC
Time (s)
pd
pv
pw
p
Model 1
2122.25
2141.08
2117.98
2118.56
2117.95
25
2.86
3.14
2.8
5
Model 2
2110.36
2155.54
2095.22
2095.93
2094.37
355
4.43
4.78
3.54
12
proposed framework and naturally capture the desired data characteristics. We fit two,
three, or four Weibull, LogLogistic or LogNormal components and also combinations of
Weibull and LogNormal components and conclude on a joint Tri-LogLogistic model for the
3N, n3N groups and the external population with common 3rd component. This model
estimates the mean survival time of 3N as 12.6 years (RMS was 13.5 years) and that of
n3N as 14 years (RMS was 14.1) and thus the 3N group on average has approximately 17
months of life less compared to n3N.
We also fitted models with data-informed change-points at 3 and 16 years, namely a Bi-
LogLogistic model on the 3N group and a joint Tri-LogLogistic for the external population
and the n3N group with common 3rd component but those models did not capture the data
features as well, particularly the sigmoid-type shape. The different models are compared
in Table 1 while the relevant figures can be found in the Appendix.
4.2
The effect of mRNA therapeutic on Melanoma
This treatment is used as an adjuvant therapy in combination with adjuvant pembrolizumab
in patients with resected melanoma at high risk of recurrence. The best fitted model for
15
Figure 2: The crossing survival curves of the 3N versus n3N groups.
Figure 3:
Extrapolated survival function (left) and hazard function (right) for the
melanoma data. We indicate the only-pembrolizumab treated group as “pembro” (dashed
line) and the pembrolizumab plus mRNA vaccine as “mRNA” (solid line). The external
population is indicated as dotted line and the end time of follow-up is indicated by a vertical
solid line.
the overall survival in the advanced melanoma dataset was a joint Tri-Weibull where the
first components of the disease and external groups are proportional to each other while the
16
third components are equal. Thus, we use m = 3 components: hp(yi; α1, α2, α3, λ1, λ2, λ3) =
h1
p(yi; α1, λ1) + h2
p(yi; α2, λ2) + h3
p(yi; α3, λ3) and the hazard of the pembrolizumab group is
given by hpembro(ti; α1, αd, α3, λ1, λd, λ3) = C ·h1
p(ti; α1, λ1)+h2
d(ti; αd, λd)+hp(ti; α3, λ3). In
this example we select the ‘constant difference’ method and use the last 5 points (months)
to write hpembro(t′) = Dpembro + hp(t′) for a future time t′. The mRNA group of patients is
derived via the proportional hazards assumption hmRNA(t) = 0.561·hpembro(t) (see Khattak
et al. 2023) where we assume that the reported hazard ratio (HR) may reasonably approxi-
mate the HR for overall survival. Extrapolation follows using hmRNA(t′) = DmRNA + hp(t′)
for future times t′.
Figure 3 depicts the extrapolated survival curves and hazard functions. Calculating the
area between the mRNA and pembrolizumab curves estimates that the adjuvant mRNA
therapeutic offers on average an additional 43.69 months of life (see right plot of Figure
4). One may broadly interpret this as patients with advanced melanoma may gain 3.64
years of life if the mRNA therapeutic is added to their treatment. In the absence of HR
estimates for overall survival we used the corresponding HR estimate for recurrence free
survival and suitable sensitivity analyses ought to be adopted if these estimates are to be
used for decision support/making.
4.3
Cardiac Arrhythmia
For this dataset we focus on the Bi-Weibull model following Benaglia et al. (2015) who found
it preferable compared to a Bi-Gompertz distribution. We assume that in the external
population the times until death due to arrhythmia, y1:np1, have a Weibull density with
hazard h1
p(yi; α1, λ1) = λ1 · α1 · yα1−1
i
and the times until death from other causes, z1:np2, a
17
Figure 4: LYG for the melanoma data. Left: LYG illustrated as the area between the two
survival curves with the end time of follow-up noted by a vertical line. Right: Density of
the LYG with its mean indicated by a vertical line.
Figure 5: Extrapolated survival function (left) and hazard function (right) for the arrhyth-
mia data. The external population is indicated as dotted line and the end time of follow-up
is indicated by a vertical solid line.
Weibull with hazard h2
p(yi; α2, λ2) = λ2 · α2 · zα2−1
i
. Then, the joint likelihood is given by:
Lp(α1, α2, λ1, λ2) =
np1
Y
i=1
h1
p(yi)δ1
i S1
p(yi)
np2
Y
j=1
h2
p(zj)δ2
j S2
p(zj)
18
Since the cause of death is unknown in the disease group data t1:nd we model them using
a Bi-Weibull model with likelihood
Ld(C, α1, α2, λ1, λ2) =
nd
Y
i=1
hd(ti)δiSd(ti)
where hd = C · h1
p + h2
p and Sd = (S1
p)C · S2
p.
We focus upon the baseline extrapolation method which in this example coincides
with the cause specific constant ratio method. The AAD group is constructed using the
published hazard ratio of 0.5 (see Section 2) for the arrhythmia-related events so that
hICD(t) = 0.5 · hAAD(t). Figure 5 depicts the extrapolated survival and hazard functions.
The estimated LYG are approximately 39.7 months, or 3.31 years on average (see right
plot of Figure 4) since AAD and ICD patients have a mean survival of 62.27 and 101.97
months respectively.
Figure 6: LYG for the arrhythmia data. Left: LYG illustrated as the area between the two
survival curves with the end time of follow-up noted by a vertical line. Right: Density of
the LYG with its mean indicated by a vertical line.
19
5
Discussion
Fitting independent poly-hazard models to the external population and the disease groups
can give seemingly good fit during the follow-up period at the cost of unstable and/or
unreliable extrapolation. This article uses methods that can avoid such erratic behaviour
by transferring appropriate information from data external to the disease group.
The
external population is based upon mortality projections as opposed to past data and the
evidence is synthesized in a Bayesian context. We found that modeling on the hazard
scale can identify incoherent fit more efficiently compared to the survival and cumulative
hazard scale. We employ an extension of the standard poly-hazard models introducing
change-points, offering added flexibility.
A review of tests for crossing survival curves may be found at Li et al. (2015). Our work
is concerned with a more involved issue, not simply testing for equality, but fully modeling
the survival curves and the calculation of their difference, as necessitated in health economic
evaluations. To do so, we transfer long term evidence to the current context thus facilitating
relatively stable extrapolation. Alternatives to poly-hazard models include splines (Jackson
2023) and fractional polynomials (Royston and Parmar 2002). Both approaches offer nearly
arbitrary flexibility at the cost of typically limited interpretability of their parameters.
Perhaps more importantly, poly-hazard models offer a natural balance between efficient
use of the data and undesirable carry-over effects.
This work was motivated by 3 use cases that include a crossing survival problem, an
emerging cancer therapeutic and a competing risks example. The unified approach pre-
sented here naturally caters for survival extrapolation in these cases. We estimate that
women with breast cancer lose on average 10.17 years compared to the general popula-
tion and we also estimate the additional deficit of the triple negative sub-population. The
20
mRNA-4157 (V940) therapeutic in combination with pembrolizumab is currently being
assessed for treatment of melanoma and by incorporating the early trial evidence within
our framework we estimate that an average of 3.64 extra years of life may be gained com-
pared to pembrolizumab alone.
The cardiac arrhythmia estimates mortality reduction
when switching from AAD to ICD treatment by retaining a common hazard on death from
other causes.
The results are assessed under five extrapolation methods. The baseline method per-
forms well in all our examples by appropriately modelling the bond between the disease
and external populations. The constant difference and ratio methods build upon the find-
ings of the follow-up period and extrapolate the last observed relationship between the two
populations into the future. We further amend these two methods by applying them to
the components of interest alone and obtain the cause-specific analogues. The proposed
methodology does require individual-level data. This problem can be resolved by digitizing
published Kaplan-Meier curves as illustrated in the melanoma and cardiac arrhythmia data.
Still, some inaccuracies may result and care is required in this aspect. In addition, expert
opinion may be elicited as done by Benaglia et al. (2015) for the age-specific proportions
of arrhythmia.
Survival analysis is also used in non-medical application areas of statistics, including
industrial, actuarial and reliability functions where the idea of transferring information from
an external source can be fruitful if extrapolation is required. Further development of the
piecewise poly-hazard models may be considered by training them based upon alternative
combinations of the disease and external groups.
The predictive ability of the models
developed in this article has been informally assessed, since in reality it is dictated by
the performance on future/unseen data. One alternative is to characterize the model’s
21
properties using an appropriate loss function on the combined clinical and registry data
and this represents the subject of current work.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Dr. Pippa Corrie for comments on the melanoma example.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
A. The details of KM digitization The procedure of digitizing a curve from a given
plot is described.
B. Some comments on typical extrapolations Comments regarding the relation be-
tween extrapolation methods are provided.
C. Mortality projections Figures regarding the mortality analysis used.
D. Precision breast cancer results Results on the extrapolation of breast cancer data
related with the 3N and n3N groups.
E. Breast cancer results Results on the application of breast cancer.
F. Advanced melanoma results Results on the application of advanced melanoma.
G. Cardiac arrhythmia results Results on the application of cardiac arrhythmia.
References
Abraham, J. E., Pinilla, K., Dayimu, A., Grybowicz, L., Demiris, N., Harvey, C., Drewett,
L. M., Lucey, R., Fulton, A., Roberts, A. N., Worley, J. R., Chhabra A., Qian, W.,
22
Vallier, L. A., Hardy, R. M., Chan, S., Hickish, T., Tripathill, D., Venkitaraman, R.,
Persic, M., Aslam, S., Glassman, D., Raj, S., Borley, A., Braybrooke, J. P., Sutherland,
S., Staples, E., Scott, L., Davies, M., Palmer, C. A., Moody, M., Churn, M. J., Newby,
J. C., Mukesh, M. B., Chakrabarti, A., Roylance, R. R., Schouten, P. C., Levitt, N.
C., McAdam, K., Armstrong, A. C., Copson, E. R., McMurtry, E., Tischkowitz, M.,
Provenzano, E, and Earl, H. M. (2024). The partner trial of neoadjuvant olaparib in
triple-negative breast cancer. Nature, 1–3.
Benaglia, T., Jackson, C. H., and Sharples, L. D. (2015). Survival extrapolation in the
presence of cause specific hazards. Statistics in Medicine 34(5), 796–811.
Bullement, A., Stevenson, M. D., Baio, G., Shields, G. E. and Latimer, N. R. (2023). A
systematic review of methods to incorporate external evidence into trial-based survival
extrapolations for health technology assessment. Medical Decision Making 43(5), 610–
620.
Buxton, M., Caine, N., Chase, D., Connelly, D., Grace, A., Jackson, C., Parkes, J., and
Sharples, L. (2006). A review of the evidence on the effects and costs of implantable
cardioverter defibrillator therapy in different patient groups, and modelling of cost-
effectiveness and cost-utility for these groups in a UK context. Health Technology As-
sessment (Winchester, England) 10(27), iii–iv.
Casellas, J. (2007). Bayesian inference in a piecewise Weibull proportional hazards model
with unknown change points. Journal of Animal Breeding and Genetics 124(4), 176–184.
cBioPortal.
Available
at
https://www.cbioportal.org/study/summary?id=brca_
metabric. Data downloaded on 28/6/2023.
23
Glaser, R. E. (1980). Bathtub and related failure rate characterizations. Journal of the
American Statistical Association 75(371), 667–672.
Che, Z., Green, N., and Baio G. (2023). Blended survival curves: A new approach to extrap-
olation for time-to-event outcomes from clinical trials in health technology assessment.
Medical Decision Making 43(3), 299–310.
Coles, C. E., Earl, H., Anderson, B. O., Barrios, C. H., Bienz, M., Bliss, J. M., Cameron, D.
A., Cardoso, F., Cui, W., Francis, P. A., Jagsi, R., Knaul, M., McIntosh, S. A., Phillips,
K.-A., Radbruch, L., Thompson, M. K., Andr´e F., Abraham., J. E., Bhattacharya, I. S.,
Franzoi, M. A., Drewett, L., Fulton, A., Kazmi, F., Rajah, D. I., Mutebi, M., Ng, D., Dg
Szeyi, Olopade O. I., Rosa, W. E., Rubasingham, J., Spence, D., Stobart, H., Enciso, V.
V., Vaz-Luis, I., and Villarreal-Garza, C. (2024). The lancet breast cancer commission.
The Lancet 403(10439), 1895–1950.
Connolly, S. J., Hallstrom, A., Cappato, R., Schron, E. B., Kuck, K.-H., Zipes, D. P.,
Greene, H. L., Boczor, S., Domanski, M., Follmann, D., Gent, M. and Roberts R. S. on
behalf of the investigators of the AVID, CASH and CIDS studies (2000). Meta-analysis
of the implantable cardioverter defibrillator secondary prevention trials. European heart
journal 21(24), 2071–2078.
Curtis, C., Shah, S. P., Chin, S.-F., Turashvili, G., Rueda, O. M., Dunning, M. J., Speed,
D., Lynch, A. G., Samarajiwa, S., Yuan, Y., Gr¨af, S., Ha, G., Haffari, G., Bashashati, A.,
Russell, R., McKinney, S., METABRIC Group, Langerød, A., Green, A., Provenzano, E.,
Wishart, G., Pinder, S., Watson., P, Markowetz, F., Murphy, L., Ellis, I., Purushotham,
A., Børresen-Dale, A.-L., Brenton, J. D., Tavar´e, S., Caldas C., and Aparicio, S. (2012).
24
The genomic and transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 breast tumours reveals novel sub-
groups. Nature 486(7403), 346–352.
Demets, D. L., and Lan, K. G. (1994).
Interim analysis: the alpha spending function
approach. Statistics in medicine 13(13-14), 1341–1352.
Demiris, N., Lunn, D., and Sharples L. D. (2015). Survival extrapolation using the poly-
weibull model. Statistical Methods in Medical Research 24(2), 287–301.
Demiris, N., and Sharples, L. (2006). Bayesian evidence synthesis to extrapolate survival
estimates in cost-effectiveness studies. Statistics in Medicine 25(11), 1960–1975.
Friedman, M. (1982). Piecewise Exponential models for survival data with covariates. The
Annals of Statistics 10(1), 101–113.
Gallacher, D., Kimani, P., and Stallard, N. (2021). Extrapolating parametric survival mod-
els in health technology assessment: a simulation study. Medical Decision Making 41(1),
37–50.
Gefeller, O., and Dette, H. (1992).
Nearest neighbour kernel estimation of the hazard
function from censored data. Journal of statistical computation and simulation 43(1-2),
93–101.
Guyot, P., Ades, A. E., Beasley, M., Lueza, B., Pignon, J.-P., and Welton, N. J. (2017).
Extrapolation of survival curves from cancer trials using external information. Medical
Decision Making 37(4), 353–366.
Hamid, O., Robert, C., Daud, A., Hodi, F., Hwu, W., Kefford, R., Wolchok, J., Hersey, P.,
Joseph, R., Weber, J., Dronca, R., Mitchell, T. C., Patnaik, A., Zarour, H. M., Joshua,
A. M., Zhao, Q., Jensen, E., Ahsan, S., Ibrahim, N., and Ribas., A. (2019). Five-year
25
survival outcomes for patients with advanced melanoma treated with pembrolizumab in
KEYNOTE-001. Annals of Oncology 30(4), 582–588.
Hoffman, M. D., and Gelman, A. (2014). The No-U-Turn sampler: adaptively setting path
lengths in Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. Journal of Machine Learning Research 15 15(1),
1593–1623.
Human Mortality Database. Max Planck Institute for demographic research (Germany),
University of California, Berkeley (USA), and French Institute for demographic studies
(France). Available at https://www.mortality.org. Data downloaded on 01/08/2023.
Jackson, C., Stevens, J., Ren, S., Latimer, N., Bojke, L., Manca, A., and Sharples, L.(2017).
Extrapolating survival from randomized trials using external data: a review of methods.
Medical decision making 37(4), 377–390.
Jackson, C. H. (2023). survextrap: a package for flexible and transparent survival extrap-
olation. BMC Medical Research Methodology 23(1), 282.
Kaplan, E. L., and Meier, P. (1958). Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observa-
tions. Journal of the American statistical association 53(282), 457–481.
Khattak, A., Carlino, M., Meniawy, T., Ansstas, G., Medina, T., Taylor, M., Kim, K.,
McKean, M., Long, G., Sullivan, R., Faries, M., Tran, T., Cowey, C., Pecora, A., Segar,
J., Atkinson, V., Gibney, G. T., Luke, J., Thomas, S., Buchbinder, E., Hou, P., Zhu,
L., Zaks, T., Brown, M., Aanur, P., Meehan, R. S., and Weber, J. S. (2023). A per-
sonalized cancer vaccine, mRNA-4157 (V940), combined with pembrolizumab versus
pembrolizumab alone in patients with resected high-risk melanoma: Efficacy and safety
results from the randomized, open-label phase 2 mRNA-4157-P201/KEYNOTE-942 trial.
CancerRes., 83:CT001.
26
Latimer, N. R., and Adler, A. I. (2022). Extrapolation beyond the end of trials to estimate
long term survival and cost effectiveness. BMJ medicine 1(1).
Lee, R. D., and Carter, L. R. (1992). Modeling and forecasting us mortality. Journal of
the American statistical association 87(419), 659–671.
Li, H., Han, D., Hou, Y., Chen, H., and Chen Z. (2015). Statistical inference methods for
two crossing survival curves: a comparison of methods. PLoS One 10(1), e0116774.
Louzada-Neto, F. (1999). Polyhazard models for lifetime data. Biometrics 55(4), 1281–
1285.
Muller, H. G., and Wang, J.-L. (1994). Hazard rate estimation under random censoring
with varying kernels and bandwidths. Biometrics, 61–76.
Pedroza, C. (2006). A bayesian forecasting model: predicting us male mortality. Biostatis-
tics 7(4), 530–550.
R Core Team (2021). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna,
Austria: R Foundation for Statistical Computing.
Robert, C., Carlino, M. S., McNeil, C., Ribas, A., Grob, J.-J., Schachter, J., Nyakas, M.,
Kee, D., Petrella, T. M., Blaustein, A., Lotem, M., Arance, A., Daud, A. I., Hamid, O.,
Larkin, J., Anderson, J., Krepler, C., Grebennik, D., and Long, G. V. (2023). Seven-year
follow-up of the phase III KEYNOTE-006 study: pembrolizumab versus ipilimumab in
advanced melanoma. Journal of Clinical Oncology 41(24), 3998–4003.
Royston, P. and Parmar, M. K. (2002).
Flexible parametric proportional-hazards and
proportional-odds models for censored survival data, with application to prognostic mod-
elling and estimation of treatment effects. Statistics in medicine 21(15), 2175–2197.
27
Rutherford, M. J., Lambert, P. C., Sweeting, M. J., Pennington, R., Crowther, M. J.,
Abrams, K. R., and Latimer, N. R. (2020). NICE DSU technical support document 21:
Flexible methods for survival analysis. Decision Support Unit, ScHARR, University of
Sheffield.
Stan Development Team (2024). RStan: the R interface to Stan. R package version 2.32.6.
Villani, A., Potestio, L., Fabbrocini, G., Troncone, G., Malapelle, U., and Scalvenzi, M.
(2022). The treatment of advanced melanoma: therapeutic update. International journal
of molecular sciences 23(12), 6388.
World Health Organization.
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/
breast-cancer.
28
