1 
 
Novel Cisplatin-Magnetoliposome Complex Shows Enhanced 
Antitumor Activity via Hyperthermia 
 
M. Carmen Jiménez-López#1, Ana Carolina Moreno-Maldonado#2, Natividad Martín-
Morales1, Francisco O’Valle1, 3, M. Ricardo Ibarra2, Gerardo F. Goya2 and Ignacio J. Molina*1,3, 
1 Institute of Biopathology and Regenerative Medicine, Center for Biomedical Research. 
Health Sciences Technology Park. University of Granada, Spain.  
2 Institute of Nanoscience and Materials of Aragón. CSIC-University of Zaragoza, Spain. 
3  Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria, ibs.GRANADA, Granada, Spain. 
*Corresponding autor: imolina@ugr.es 
#MCJL and ACMM contributed equally to this work 
KEYWORDS: Magnetoliposomes; Magnetic hyperthermia; cis-diamminedichloroplatinum 
(II); CDDP; Lung tumor; Pancreas tumor 
 
 
2 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATURES: 
CDDP: cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) (Cisplatin) 
MNP: Magnetic nanoparticle 
ML: Magnetoliposome 
MLC: CDDP-encapsulated synthetic magnetoliposome 
MF:  Magnetic field 
LC: CDDP-encapsulated liposome 
TEM: Transmission electron microscopy 
ICP-OES: Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy 
 
 
 
3 
 
ABSTRACT 
There are several methods to improve cancer patient survival rates by inducing 
hyperthermia in tumor tissues, which involves raising their temperature above 41°C. These 
methods utilize different energy sources to deliver heat to the target region, including light, 
microwaves or radiofrequency electromagnetic fields. We have developed a new, 
magnetically responsive nanocarrier, consisting of liposomes loaded with magnetic 
nanoparticles and cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) (CDDP), commonly known as 
Cisplatin.  
The resulting magnetoliposome (ML) is rapidly internalized by lung and pancreas tumor 
cell lines, stored in intracellular vesicles, and capable of inducing hyperthermia under 
magnetic fields. The ML has no significant toxicity both in vitro and in vivo and, most 
importantly, enhances cell death by apoptosis after magnetic hyperthermia. Remarkably, 
mice bearing induced lung tumors, treated with CDDP-loaded nanocarriers and subjected 
to an applied electromagnetic field, showed an improved survival rate over those treated 
with either soluble CDDP or hyperthermia alone. Therefore, our approach of magnetic 
hyperthermia plus CDDP-ML significantly enhances in vitro cell death and in vivo survival of 
treated animals. 
 
 
 
4 
 
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, the overall survival rates of cancer patients have significantly improved due 
to the introduction of new therapies. However, the life expectancy for patients with certain 
tumors, particularly lung and pancreas, remains alarmingly low1. While the introduction of 
of immune checkpoint inhibitors has extended the lifespan of lung cancer patients2, 
pancreatic cancers are largely refractory to immunotherapy3. Therefore, the development 
of innovative therapies to treat these and other tumors is imperative. 
Hyperthermia utilizes non-ionizing radiations, usually using laser-mediated energy 
(photothermal therapy) or radiofrequency fields (magnetic hyperthermia) to elevate tissue 
temperature above 41˚C4.  Temperatures within targeted tissues of up to 43 ˚C will primarily 
cause cell death by apoptosis5, whereas heat treatments of 44 ˚C  and higher will trigger cell 
necrosis6. In addition, fragmentation of the cell membrane caused by hyperthermia favors 
the release of tumor antigens, and therefore, enhances T cell-mediated cytotoxicity7 
resulting in enhanced overall effectiveness of the antitumor response. Immune-mediated 
effects of hyperthermia include the induction of heat-shock proteins8, 9, secretion of pro-
inflammatory cytokines10, enhancement of NK cell activity11 and dendritic cell function12, 
among others. Because it has been shown that cells in the S or M phases of the cell cycle are 
more sensitive to hyperthermia13, this approach has garnered considerable interest as an 
innovative antitumor therapy since it would have a preferential effect over cells undergoing 
division.  
The cytotoxic effect of hyperthermia can be enhanced by the concurrent use of 
nanoparticles. In the case of laser-mediated photothermal therapy, inorganic nanoparticles 
that accumulate in the tumor site can absorb laser-emitted light, increasing the destruction 
of target cells4, 14, 15. Remarkably, simultaneous administration of immune checkpoint 
inhibitors was particularly efficient in animal models15. On the other hand, iron oxide-based 
particles, such as zinc-doped iron oxide nanoparticles (ZnxFe3-xO4), demonstrated superior 
5 
 
heating efficiency under alternating magnetic fields compared to pure magnetite16, 17. This 
enhanced efficiency is attributed to the lower magnetic anisotropy of ZnxFe3-xO4 magnetic 
nanoparticles (MNPs) compared to pure magnetite. It is worth noting that pure ZnFe₂O₄ 
nanoparticles are not suitable for hyperthermia due to their antiferromagnetic 
configuration. Furthermore, the biocompatibility of zinc makes it an attractive option for in 
vivo applications. While zinc-doped nanoparticles retain favorable magnetic properties for 
heating, they also reduce toxicity, enhancing their potential for both in vitro and in vivo 
cancer therapies16. Additionally, it is known that the related Zn-containing phase, zinc oxide 
(ZnO) nanoparticles, are safely used in pharmaceutical applications, such as cosmetics as 
well as food packaging and personal care products, owing to their antimicrobial and 
antifungal properties18, 19. This underscores the versatility of zinc-based nanoparticles, 
making them a promising candidate for combined hyperthermia and drug delivery systems 
in cancer treatments 20, where both therapeutic efficacy and safety are paramount 21.  
The encapsulation of both MNPs and cytotoxic drugs within liposomes results in the so 
called Magnetoliposomes (ML), which offer a promising approach for targeted drug 
delivery. ML can concentrate nanoparticles at the treatment site, potentially enhancing the 
efficacy of hyperthermia therapy22, 23. This dual functionality enables ML to act as effective 
carriers of chemotherapeutic agents24, 25.  On the other hand, iron oxide-based particles 
encapsulated in liposomes (ML) are particularly efficient in generating heat after a magnetic 
field is applied from an external source22. Interestingly, it has been reported that the cellular 
damage caused by hyperthermia correlates with the location of the uptaken magnetic 
nanoparticles26. 
MLs can be functionally improved by encapsulating a cytotoxic drug24, 25, a modification that 
allows nanoparticles to serve as carriers of chemotherapeutic agents. Since hyperthermia 
increases the blood flow to the treated area, it is therefore expected that chemotherapeutic-
loaded ML will preferentially target the tumor site, an effect that can be further amplified 
by application of a magnetic field27. Intracellular availability of the encapsulated 
6 
 
antineoplastic drug may therefore achieve high cytotoxic effects with low doses of 
chemotherapy, thereby reducing the adverse systemic effects of chemotherapy. 
We have herein developed a cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) (CDDP) (commonly known 
as Cisplatin)-encapsulated ML and found that this formulation is well tolerated in vivo and 
produces antineoplastic additive effects compared to hyperthermia alone in both in vitro 
and in vivo models of lung and pancreas tumors. 
 
 
 
7 
 
RESULTS 
Physicochemical characterization of synthetic MLs. We successfully synthesized 
magnetoliposomes that showed particle clusters with a Gaussian distribution of mean value 
(281±60) nm, as revealed by low-resolution cryo-Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) 
(Figure 1, panel A). In addition, some isolated, dispersed MNPs were also observed. High-
Resolution TEM images showed a gap larger than 8 nm between MNPs, corresponding to 
the organic coating material (Figure 1, panel B). Within the ML, MNPs were densely packed 
and surrounded by the lipid coating.  
The MNPs were designed to maximize heat generation after their integration into the ML 
while maintaining their average size around 15 nm to ensure good integration into the ML. 
To achieve this, the MNPs were synthesized with a composition of Zn₀.₂Fe₂.₈O₄ to optimize 
the magnetic parameters for heating efficiency 28. High-resolution TEM images confirmed 
the high crystallinity with an average diameter of 15 ± 2 nm (Figure 1, panel C). The 
corresponding two-dimensional electron diffraction patterns matched the Fd3m space 
group, with contributions from the (111), (220), (311), (222), (422), (333), and (440) Miller 
indices (reference pattern: 00-001-1111). ICP-OES analysis revealed a Zn₀.₁Fe₂.₉O₄ 
composition, with the measured Zn concentration deviating slightly from the nominal value 
(Figure 1, panel D).  
8 
 
 
Figure 1. Cryo-transmission electron microscopy analysis of MNPs. Top row. Cryo-TEM images of 
ML. A: low magnification image with histogram and Gaussian distribution of ML (inset panel). B: ML 
cryo-TEM image, where MNPs appear as aligned in curved chains. Bottom row.  C:  TEM image of 
Zn0,2Fe2,8O4 MNPs and their corresponding size histogram (inset panel) showing a Gaussian 
distribution. D: Electron diffraction with crystallographic Miller indexes. 
With a surface charge of 15.4±0.6 mV, the ML exhibited suspension stability for over 24 
hours and, in all cases, short vortex was enough for full resuspension. The typical 
concentrations of phospholipids, MNPs, and CDDP in the different samples are summarized 
in Table 1. Notably, for samples with similar MNPs and CDDP concentrations, the 
encapsulation efficiency of both MNPs and CDDP remained unaffected by the presence of 
the other agent, suggesting successful co-encapsulation within the ML. The smaller 
9 
 
concentration of lipids observed in MLC samples could indicate that the presence of CDDP 
favors the formation of unilamellar lipidic membranes. 
Table 1. Lipid, magnetic nanoparticles and CDDP concentrations of indicated vectors. 
Vector 
[Lipid]  
mg/mL 
[MNPs] 
mg/mL 
[CDDP] 
mg/mL 
L 
5.7±0.3 
- 
- 
LC 
4.5±0.4 
- 
7.08±0.5 
ML 
5.6±0.3 
3.3±0.3 
- 
MLC 
2.7±0.7 
3.6±0.7 
7.97±0.5 
L: 
blank 
liposome; 
LC: 
CDDP-encapsulated 
liposome; 
ML: 
blank 
magnetoliposome 
(liposome+magnetic 
nanoparticles); 
MLC: 
CDDP-encapsulated 
magnetoliposome 
(liposome+nanoparticles+CDDP). Calibration curves are available in the supplemental material. 
 
ML cell uptake and in vitro hyperthermia of loaded cells. We assessed the internalization 
of MLs and the kinetics of this process through a time-course evaluation of the iron 
concentration present in cell pellets and culture supernatants. Significant cellular uptake 
occurred rapidly (10 and 20 m) for both cell lines, reaching a plateau of 60-70% of available 
iron after 4-6 h of incubation with the nanoparticles (Figure 2A).  
We also evaluated the capacity of MLs to induce and sustain hyperthermia in treated cells. 
These cells were loaded for 4 h with increasing amounts of nanoparticles and then exposed 
to a magnetic field. Live recording of cell pellets demonstrated that the target temperature 
of 41°C was quickly reached and maintained with 200 µg of ML (green line), which had a 
slope of m=0.082 (Figure 2B). This value is only slightly lower than the slope observed with 
500 µg of nanoparticles (m=0.099; red line). Consequently, all subsequent experiments 
utilized 200 µg of nanoparticles. 
10 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Time-course assessment of ML uptake by cell lines and in vitro hyperthermia. Panel A. 
LL2 and Panc02 cell lines were incubated with 200 µg of iron magnetoliposomes at indicated time 
points. Cells were collected and iron content present in cell pellets and culture supernatants was 
determined by spectrophotometry. A representative experiment out of three is shown. Panel B. Cells 
were incubated for 4 h with 100 (purple line), 200 (green line), 500 (red line) or 1000 (blue line) µg 
of MLs and exposed to magnetic field. Temperatures were recorded at 1 s intervals. Line slopes 
within the indicated marks (diamond dots) were calculated with the equation 𝑚𝑚=
𝑦𝑦2−𝑦𝑦1
(𝑥𝑥2−𝑥𝑥1) ×  100. 
11 
 
100 µg: m= 0.014; 200 µg: 0.082; 500 µg: m= 0.099; 1000 µg: m= 0.152. A representative experiment 
out of three is shown. 
Subcellular localization of internalized nanoparticles. We examined the intracellular 
distribution of MLs by TEM after subjecting cells, or not, to magnetic hyperthermia. 
Temperature was limited in all experiments to 41oC to prevent cell death by necrosis. It can 
readily be observed that nanoparticles are internalized and clustered within intracellular 
vesicles (arrows) after a membranes fusion process that is evident for LL2 (Figure 3A) and 
Panc02 cells (Figure 3B). Application of magnetic fields to cells resulted in hyperthermia 
and some perturbation of cell structures, without inducing a significant cytopathic effect, 
and thus most cells to remain viable at the time of analysis. Both untreated cell lines showed 
nuclear and cytoplasmic integrity with preservation of the microvilli, and blank liposomes 
are also present in the cytosol and extracellularly.  
 
12 
 
 
Figure 3. Transmission electron microscopy of ML-treated cell lines. LL2 (Panel A) and Panc02 
(Panel B) cell lines were incubated for 4 h with 200 µg of blank liposomes (2nd from left, top row); 
blank magnetoliposome without (3rd from left, top row) or after 10 m of magnetic hyperthermia 
(first from left, bottom row); or CDDP-encapsulated ML without (second from left, bottom row) or 
after magnetic hyperthermia (third from left, bottom row). Untreated cells are shown in the upper 
first panel from left. Representative images from two independent experiments were selected by 
blind observers. Cells were immediately collected and processed as indicated in Materials and 
Methods. UT: Untreated cells; L: blank liposome; ML: blank magnetoliposome (liposome+magnetic 
nanoparticles); MLC: CDDP-encapsulated ML (liposome+nanoparticles+CDDP); MF: Magnetic field.  
Cytotoxic effects of CDDP-encapsulated MLs. To determine whether the CDDP- ML induced 
cell death after internalization, we performed cell cycle analyses 48 h after cell exposure to 
hyperthermia induced by nanocarriers and magnetic field. We identified the percentage of 
cells located within the Sub-G1 peak, which is considered an indirect marker of cell dead by 
apoptosis 29. LL2 (Figure 4, top panel) and Panc02 (Figure 4, bottom panel) cells treated 
with 50 µM CDDP, used as positive control, showed a significant Sub-G1 accumulation 
(second column from left, top row). However, this was not observed at the 1 µM dose 
(second column from left, bottom row), a sub-optimal concentration chosen to highlight 
13 
 
additive effects of CDDP-MLs. Liposomes (first column from left, bottom row) and blank 
nanocarriers (third column from left, top row) showed no cellular toxicity. We found that 
the percentage of cells accumulating into the Sub-G1 fraction is higher after hyperthermia 
exposure (third and fourth columns, bottom row) compared to their counterparts not 
subjected to magnetic field (same columns, top row). Remarkably, the percentage of cells 
within the Sub-G1 fraction obtained with the CDDP-encapsulated ML is higher when 
exposed to a magnetic field (fourth column, bottom row) compared to the values obtained 
for cells not exposed to magnetic field (fourth column, top row).  
 
Figure 4. Cell cycle analysis of cell lines treated with MLs. LL2 (top panel) and Panc02 cells were 
incubated for 4 h with indicated amounts of MLs and exposed, or not, to magnetic field. Cell cycles 
were determined after 48 h of culture and staining with Propidium Iodide. Markers indicate 
percentage of cells within the Sub-G1 fraction. A representative experiment out of five is shown. L: 
blank liposome; LC: CDDP-encapsulated liposome; ML: blank synthetic magnetoliposome 
14 
 
(liposome+magnetic nanoparticles); MLC: CDDP-encapsulated ML (liposome+nanoparticles+CDDP); 
MF: Magnetic field. A representative experiment out of three is shown. 
To confirm the cytotoxic effect of the ML, we double stained cells with Propidium Iodide and 
Annexin-V. Propidium Iodide intercalates into double-strand DNA of cells with permeable 
membranes, whereas Annexin-V is a compound that binds to phosphatidylserine on 
membrane of cells undergoing apoptosis 30. Annexin-V single positive cells indicate cells in 
early stages of apoptosis, whereas double positivity identifies cells that are already in a late 
apopoptotic stage. Figure 5A shows a vigorous death of LL2 cells treated with CDDP 50 µM 
(far left column, central row), as opposed to the suboptimal dose of 1 µM (far left column, 
bottom row). However, liposomes (second column, bottom row) and MLs (second column, 
central row) conjugated with this low CDDP dose were able to trigger, as expected, a 
discrete cell death due to improved delivery of the drug. A time-dependent increase in cell 
death was observed after exposing cellst magnetic hyperthermia for 5, 10 and 15 m (third 
column). Remarkably, significantly higher percentages of Annexin-V stained cells were 
obtained when treated with the CDDP-conjugated MLs (far right column) compared to the 
values obtained in those incubated with their blank counterparts (third column). This 
additive effect, resulting from the intracellular availability of CDDP within the MLs, is clearly 
observed at all times of hyperthermia. Furthermore, similar pronounced additive cytotoxic 
effects of CDDP-loaded MLs were also observed in Panc02 cells (Figure 5B), particularly 
after 10 and 15 minutes of hyperthermia (right column, central and bottom rows). 
15 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Annexin-V staining of cells exposed to MLs and magnetic hyperthermia. Panel A). LL2 
cells were stained after 48 h of treatment with CDDP 50 µM or 1 µM (far left columns, central and 
bottom rows); CDDP conjugated (second column, top row) or blank liposomes (second column, 
bottom row) and blank MLs (second column, central row). Cells loaded with blank (third column) or 
16 
 
CDDP-conjugated MLs (fourth column) were subject to 5, 10 and 15 minutes of magnetic 
hyperthermia. Panel B). Panc02 cells were treated and shown as in Panel A. L: blank liposome; LC: 
CDDP-encapsulated liposome; ML: blank synthetic magnetoliposome (liposome+magnetic 
nanoparticles); MLC: CDDP-encapsulated magnetoliposome (liposome+nanoparticles+CDDP); MF: 
Magnetic field. A representative experiment out of three is shown. Percentages of cells within each 
quadrant are indicated. 
Safety and tolerability of MLs in vivo. To assess the in vivo tolerability of the formulated 
ML, we evaluated acute toxicity one week after i. p. injection of a single dose of MLs. Chronic 
adverse effects were studied by necropsying animals after receiving three i.p. weekly doses 
over a period of 30 days. We found absence of significant histopathological lesions in the 
different organs analyzed after acute or chronic inoculation with MLs. However, the CDDP-
conjugated MLs group presented moderate acute tubular necrosis and tubular nuclear 
atypia in all mice in the group. In the chronic toxicity experiment, 40% of the mice showed 
hepatic inflammatory infiltrate and macrovesicular steatosis (Figure 6). These adverse 
effects are compatible with the inherent toxicity of CDDP 31. 
 
Figure 6. Analysis of in vivo toxicity of MLs.  Representative microphotographs of the 
histopathological lesions induced in the in vivo toxicity analysis in mice. We observed in the MLC 
group (liposome + nanoparticles + CDDP) scant acute tubular necrosis, and mild tubular dilation and 
nuclear dysplasia (arrow) in kidney; diffuse macrovacuolar steatosis (arrows), and moderate chronic 
17 
 
inflammatory infiltrate (asterisk) in liver; no injury was detected in lung. In the ML-treated mice 
(liposome+magnetic nanoparticles) no tissue damage was detected, except a scant intraparenchymal 
inflammatory infiltrate in liver (asterisk) in some mice. Nanoparticles were weekly injected i.p. for 3 
weeks and 5 mice per group were analyzed at day 30. Hematoxylin-eosin, original magnification 10x.  
Bar scale: 100 micrometers. 
In vivo effects of hyperthermia mediated by MLs. To address the ability of MLs to induce 
in vivo hyperthermia, lung and pancreas cell lines were inoculated s.c. into one flank of the 
animals. One week after tumor induction, blank and CDDP-conjugated MLs were injected 
into the tumor mass, and animals were thereafter exposed to magnetic field. Real-time 
assessment of temperature indicated that tumors induced in all animals reached the 
intended target temperature of 41oC, although with varying line slopes (Figure 7A). 
Hyperthermia was maintained for 10 m without adverse effects.  
We subsequently explored the efficacy of CDDP-conjugated MLs in controlling the 
development of tumors. An ectopic lung tumor was induced by injecting LL2 cells in one 
flank, and 7 days thereafter the animals were treated with weekly injections of nanocarriers 
and monitored for weight loss and survival. Figure 7B shows a significant weight loss in 
CDDP-treated animals (gray line), leading to interruption of the follow-up at day 28 due to 
ethics considerations. In contrast, ML-treated mice avoided significant weight loss, 
particularly in animals receiving blank (yellow line) or CDDP conjugated (red line) ML in 
combination with hyperthermia. 
The survival data of animals over the trial period was plotted in a Kaplan-Meier graph 
(Figure 7C).  A delay in mortality is clearly observed in the group of mice treated with CDDP-
ML and magnetic field (red line) compared to their counterparts not receiving hyperthermia 
(blue line) as well as mice treated with blank ML plus hyperthermia (yellow line). However, 
by day 35 the survival rates of both groups was equivalent.  
 
18 
 
 
19 
 
  
Figure 7. In vivo effects of MLs. Panel A, Intratumoral in vivo hyperthermia induced by ML and MF. 
200 µg of blank (red lines) or CDDP-conjugated (green lines) MLs were injected into the syngeneic 
LL2 tumor mass one week after induction. Temperatures were recorded at 1 s intervals. Lines 
represent individual animals. Similar results were obtained with animals with pancreas tumors 
induced by injecting Panc02 cells. Panel B. A lung tumor model was induced by injecting animals with 
106 syngeneic LL2 cells, and 7 days afterwards they began to receive weekly intratumor injections of 
indicated ML or soluble CDDP with or without magnetic hyperthermia. Weight was determined at 
indicated timepoints and plotted as variations over their initial weight (g) prior tumor induction. 
Panel C. Survival of the animals depicted in Panel B. n= 5 mice per group. UT: untreated mice; ML: 
blank synthetic magnetoliposome (liposome+magnetic nanoparticles); CDDP: soluble CDDP; MLC: 
CDDP-encapsulated synthetic magnetoliposome (liposome+nanoparticles+CDDP); MF: Magnetic 
field. MLC: CDDP-encapsulated magnetoliposome (liposome+nanoparticles+CDDP); MF: Magnetic 
field.  
 
 
20 
 
DISCUSSION 
Many efficient hyperthermia-based interventions have shown improved survival of 
patients, including intravesical irrigation with fluids at 41o-45oC32, as well as other 
therapeutic approaches33, 34 which include concomitant chemotherapy35. In spite of its 
benefits, the effects of photothermal-mediated hyperthermia are limited to superficial 
tumors, since this type of energy cannot penetrate deep tissues. In contrast, MLs could 
overcome this hurdle as they preferentially target highly vascularized tumors27. The  
accumulation of particles is favored by the atypical and unpredictable lymphatic drainage 
of the tumor area36. Moreover, the so called enhanced permeability and retention effect of 
macromolecules is a prominent strategy for targeting  solid tumors37. Since magnetic fields 
can penetrate deeper into tissues, it is feasible to induce hyperthermia in these areas.  
The present work shows that the ML are rapidly internalized and accumulate in 
intracellular vesicles, as revealed by electron microscopy. Even though liposomes are 
generally well tolerated, some toxicity has been previously reported38.  However, our 
systematic in vitro and in vivo assessments revealed excellent tolerance of blank ML at 
concentrations suitable for accelerated hyperthermia treatments. Using a non-adiabatic 
coil, we achieved a temperature increase of 15°C in less than 4 minutes with 200 μg of MNPs, 
with a magnetic field of 584 G, 128 kHz. These results are promising compared to literature 
data 39-41, suggesting a fast and comfortable treatment since it took in the aforementioned 
studies around 10 m to reach our targeted temperature. The LL2 cell line exhibited a 
sensitivity to the duration of magnetic hyperthermia treatment, achieving 50% cell death in 
less than 15 minutes at 41°C. This result was not observed in the adenocarcinoma cell 
model. Compared to other reported studies42, our results with CDDP-loaded ML are highly 
promising. For example, in KB cells, a 44% reduction in cell viability was achieved using ML 
at 290 kHz and 43.5°C for 1 hour39. In B16F10 cells, a maximum cell death of 80% was 
observed after 1 hour of exposure to 224 kHz and 20mT using ML and decrease until 40% 
with ML loaded with doxorubicin (0.5µg/mL)43. In all experiments, the addition of CDDP-
21 
 
ML complexes further increased cell death, demonstrating the enhanced efficacy of drug 
delivery and hyperthermia in combination. 
Our comprehensive examination of in vitro and in vivo adverse effects showed good 
tolerance of the present blank nanocarriers (not loaded with CDDP) at concentrations 
necessary for rapid hyperthermia. The lack of significant in vivo toxicity of the empty 
nanocarriers was a prerequisite for exploring the effect of their CDDP counterparts over 
tumors induced in animals after injection of syngeneic lung cells in the flank. The 
combination of safety, rapid and sustained hyperthermia and the intracellular localization 
of the present ML are prominent features towards effective antitumor therapy. 
The release of the chemotherapeutic agent is generally achieved after heat modifies the 
liposome permeability and allows escape of the encapsulated drug44 without disturbing the 
structure of the nanocarrier45, 46. To assess whether the cytotoxic effect of the CCDP-loaded 
ML had an additive effect compared to CDDP or hyperthermia alone, we incubated tumor 
cells with nanoparticles loaded with non-lethal dose of CDDP. Remarkably, the time-
dependent cell death induced by hyperthermia with blank nanocarriers is clearly increased 
when CDDP-loaded ML were used. This indicates that the combined and simultaneous 
action of magnetic hyperthermia and CDDP chemotherapy using CDDP-loaded ML increases 
the cytotoxic effects compared to each therapy alone. In addition, and because high tumor 
cell death was achieved with a very low dose of CDDP, this strategy could represent a valid 
alternative to overcome some of the serious adverse effects observed with the higher doses 
of CDDP required to achieve therapeutic benefit31. Interestingly, the additive cytotoxic 
effects were observed in both lung and pancreas tumor cell lines, thus suggesting that the 
broad applicability of CDDP-ML across various tumor lineages.  
Injection of syngeneic lung cells in the flank is a common model of in vivo tumors that 
recapitulates their biological behavior despite its ectopic location15 and, indeed, we 
obtained a mass of lung tumor cells that developed rapidly. Interestingly, the efficacy of the 
22 
 
CDDP-loaded nanocarrier was demonstrated by improved survival rates of mice over those 
treated with intratumor soluble CDDP. Likewise, a better tolerability of CDDP-ML is also 
evident as indicated by reduced total weight loss. This also probably contributes to the 
extended overall survival of animals, since differences of tumor sizes at equivalent 
timepoints were not substantial (not shown).  
Application of magnetic field to animals yielded two key results. First, an improvement in 
the survival of mice treated with empty nanocarriers, indicating the beneficial effect of 
hyperthermia alone. And second, and most important, a significant increase in overall 
survival of mice treated with nanocarriers loaded with low dose CDDP. This provides strong 
evidence that, as it was the case in vitro, there is an efficient nanocarrier-mediated CDDP 
intratumor accumulation, which contributes to the observed additive effects with 
hyperthermia. Although the endpoints of ML and MLC treated mice are similar, this is 
probably due to the small number of mice composing each group, as the overall tendency 
favors survival of mice treated with the CDDP nanocarrier (MLC). 
In summary, we provided evidence of the in vitro and, remarkably, in vivo effectiveness of 
our nanocarrier. Nevertheless, further studies are needed to determine whether modifying 
the physical characteristics of the magnetic field – such as combining higher intensity with 
higher frequency – may result in more efficient hyperthermia and improvement of the 
CDDP-loaded nanocarrier antitumor activity.  
 
 
23 
 
METHODS 
Cell lines and culture. LL/2(LLc1) (murine lung carcinoma, from mouse C57BL Lewis) was 
obtained from the University of Granada’s cell repository (ATCC-affiliated); Panc02 (murine 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma) was kindly provided by Dr. Santos Mañes, National Center of 
Biotechnology-CSIC, Madrid. Cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium 
(DMEM; Gibco BRL, Waltham, MA, USA), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 
1% (v/v) Penicillin-Streptomycin (both from Gibco), and incubated at 37°C under 5% CO2. 
Cell cultures were split at 70–80% confluence with TrypLE (Gibco). TrypLE (T25–1 ml, 5 
min, 37°C) was inactivated with supplemented DMEM growth medium.  
Mice and Ethics Committee. Animal experimentation was carried out after review of the 
Ethics Committee on Laboratory Animals of the University of Granada and approval from 
the Department of Agriculture, Livestock, Fisheries and Sustainable Development of the 
Regional Government of Andalucía (Authorization number 24/04/2019/072). All 
protocols involved in this study followed European Union regulations and requirements 
on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes and the ARRIVE guidelines47. 
Animals received Buprenorphine hydrochloride 0.3mg/ml (VetViva Richter, Weis, 
Austria) as post-surgical analgesia to a final dose of 0.1 mg/kg s.c. C57BL/6N-Tyrc-
Brd/BrdCrCrl mice were purchased from Charles River Laboratories (Barcelona, Spain) and 
grown in our animal facilities. These mice are a spontaneous albino strain coisogenic of 
C57BL/6 strain.  
ML production and characterization.  The constituent MNPs of the ML were produced 
with composition Zn0,2Fe2,8O4 using the thermal decomposition method with iron 
acetylacetonate (Fe(acac)3≥99.9%) and zinc acetylacetonate (Zn(acac)2, for synthesis) in 
benzylether (98%), and oleic acid (technical grade, 90%) and oleylamine (technical grade, 
70%) as surfactants. For a typical synthesis, a mixture of 12 mM acac, 8 mM oleic acid, 12 
mM oleylamine, 4 mM 1,2-octanediol, and 40 ml benzylether was prepared (all from Sigma-
24 
 
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). In a 250 mL three-neck glass flask reactor and under mechanical 
stirring (50 rpm), the mixture was heated up to 100 °C for 20 m, in a flow of nitrogen gas 
(0,4ml/min) and one neck was thereafter closed with a bulb reflux and the reaction was 
heated up to 200°C for 20 m. The nitrogen flux was closed and the solution was further 
heated up to 300 °C (boiling temperature of benzylether), and maintained for 60 m. The 
synthesized MNPs were cleaned by sonication with ethanol and collected using a strong 
neodymium magnet. The precipitate was resuspended in toluene and kept overnight at 
40°C. Ligand exchange was performed as described48 to obtain citrate-coated hydrophilic 
MNPs. 
To prepare the liposome-based systems, a 1:3 ratio of aqueous to organic phases were used 
in a 100 mL round flask. The aqueous phase consisted of buffer citrate with hydrophilic 
MNPs and CDDP (≥99.9% trace metal basis). The organic phase contained 45% 1,2-
dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine 
(DPPC, 
≥99%), 
20% 
dimethyldioctadecylammonium bromide (DODAB, ≥99%), 30% cholesterol (≥99%), and 
5% PEG-2000 dissolved in chloroform and dispersed in diethyl ether (all from Avanti Polar 
Lipids, Alabaster, AL). Both phases were tempered and blended by sonication (Ultrasonic 
Vibra-cell VCX 130) at 60°C in a water bath. The organic phase was removed in a rotary 
evaporator at 200 rpm and 60°C under a gentle vacuum of 0.2 mmHg, which produced a 
slime on the bottom of the flask. The vacuum was afterwards gradually increased to 0.5 
mmHg to create a homogeneous liquid emulsion and then to 0.8 mmHg for 10 minutes. The 
emulsion was then removed and left to stabilize overnight in a desiccator, extruded through 
1 µm pore size filters (Lipofast L-50 from Avestin®) at 60°C to obtain ML. Loading CDDP 
system (LC and LNC) were dialyzed in citrate buffer for 4 hours, with a change in the 
receiving phase after 2 hours.  
 The quantification of iron (the respective MNPs extrapolation) and CDDP, along with the 
lipid composition of the sample, were determined as described49-51 by UV spectroscopy on 
a Shimadzu UV-1280 spectrometer. To determine the amount of CDDP encapsulated within 
25 
 
MLC, the lipid bilayer was disrupted by treating with Triton X-100 and vortexing. This 
released the encapsulated CDDP. For calibration, liposomes without CDDP were added to 
the measurement to account for any potential interference from lipids. For the phospholipid 
calibration, 1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine was used as a lipid standard 
solution. Illustrative calibration curves are provided in the supplemental material 
(Supplemental Figures 1-3). 
Analysis of ML cell uptake. Cells were cultured with 200 µg of nanoparticles  for indicated 
timepoints, after which pelleted cells and culture supernatants were added 500 µL of HNO3 
plus 500 µL of HCl 6M for 1 h and finally all samples were taken to a final volume of 10 ml 
with HCl 6M.  500 µL of this solution was mixed with 500 µL ammonium thiocyanate 
([NH4]SCN) and read by spectrometry at λ=478 nm. The amount of iron present in either 
the cell pellet or supernatant was determined by extrapolation to a calibration curve using 
FeCl3 0.0010 M. 
Tumor induction and in vivo hyperthermia. Animals received one s.c. injection in one 
flank containing 106 washed syngeneic LL2 or Panc02 tumor cells. At indicated timepoints, 
mice were anesthetized through continuous inhalation of isofluorane (IsoVet, Braun, 
Barcelona, Spain). CDDP nanocarriers were injected once a week into the tumor to a final 
drug concentration of 6mg/kg and supplemented with empty ML up to 200 µg of 
nanoparticles per mouse. A thermographic probe was placed intratumor and animals 
received a Magnetic Field of 584 Gauss at a frequency 128.20 kHz, chosen for technical 
considerations and animal safety, applied by a D5 series machine (nanoScale Biomagnetics 
nB, Zaragoza, Spain) until reaching a sustained temperature of 410C for 10 minutes 
monitored by the MANIAC v1.0 software.  
Histopathological analyses. Tissue samples ex vivo from different organs (liver, pancreas, 
gut, spleen, kidney, lung, heart, and brain) and tumors were retrieved and processed for 
morphological analysis. They were immediately fixed in 10% buffered formalin at room 
26 
 
temperature for 48 h. Paraffin-embedded samples were deparaffinized in xylol (3 passes of 
5 min) and then re-hydrated in ethanol following a decreasing gradation procedure 
(absolute, 96%, and 70%, 2 passes of 3 min, respectively), and stained for hematoxylin-
eosin (H&E). A BX42 light microscope (Olympus Optical Company, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) with 
a 10x objective was used to study the samples by taking images with a CD70 camera 
(Olympus Optical Company, Ltd.) 
In vitro hyperthermia. 30x103 cells per well were seeded into 6 well plates 24 h prior 
addition of indicated nanoparticles. Media was changed and nanoparticles incubated for 4 
h. After harvest and washes, pelleted cells and free nanoparticles were subject to the above 
described magnetic and temperature conditions. Cell cultures were resumed for 48 h, unless 
otherwise indicated, prior analyses. 
Cell cycle analyses and Annexin-V staining. 30x103 cells per well were treated with 
nanoparticles and subject, or not, to magnetic hyperthermia. Analysis of cell cycle was 
performed after fixation with 70% cold ethanol, followed by DNA extraction and Propidium 
Iodide staining as described52. Alternatively, cells treated as above were stained using the 
eBioscience™ Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit FITC (Invitrogen) according to 
manufacturer’s recommendations and analyzed by flow cytometry. 
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Cells precultured for 24h were treated with 
nanoparticles and subject, or not, to magnetic hyperthermia as indicated above and cultured 
for 4 h. Cells were thereafter washed and fixed for 24 h at 4oC in a solution of 2,5%  
glutaraldehyde and 2% paraformaldehyde in 0.05 M cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4). Cells were 
washed with 0.1M cacodylate buffer and post-fixed with 1% osmium tetroxide containing 
1% of potassium ferro/ferricyanide, washed again in distilled water treated with 1% tannic 
acid and stained in block with 2% uranyl acetate for 2h. The samples were dehydrated in 
increasing concentrations of ethanol (50, 70, 90 y 3x100%) 10 min, and then infiltrated and 
embedded in EMbed 812/ethanol. The samples were then polymerized in pure EMbed 812 
27 
 
at 60ºC during 48 h. Ultrathin sections (50-70nm) were cut using a Leica ultramicrotome 
(Ultracut S; Leica, Deerfield, IL) and then stained with 1% uranyl acetetate and lead citrate 
in a CO2-free atmosphere. The stained samples were examined in a LIBRA 120 PLUS (Carl 
Zeiss SMT) using an accelerating voltage of 80-120 kV.  A minimum of 10 fields were 
photographed by two blind observers. 
 
 
28 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We are grateful to the staff of the Center for Scientific Instrumentation of the University of 
Granada for invaluable help, in particular those from the Center for Animal Experimentation 
for skillful care of our animals; Mohamed Tassi and David Porcel for expert Transmission 
Electron Microscopy and Gustavo Ortiz for help with flow cytometry. We are also grateful 
to Nicolas Cassinelli and Irene Torres from nanoScale Biomagnetics nB for help with the 
magnetic applicator.  
This work was supported by grant RTC-2017-6620-1 from the Ministry of Science and 
Innovation of Spain.  
This work is in partial fulfillment of the requisites of the University of Granada Ph.D. 
program in Biomedicine towards MCJL degree. 
 
 
29 
 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION 
MCJL performed all cell and in vivo experiments; ACMM synthesized all magnetoliposomes; 
NMM and FO performed histopathological studies; MRI and GFG conceptualized and 
developed all magnetoliposomes; IJM directed and supervised the work and wrote the 
manuscript. 
 
COMPETING INTEREST  
All authors declare no competing interests. 
 
DATA AVAILABILITY DECLARATION 
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available from 
the corresponding author on reasonable request. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
References 
 
 
1.      
Siegel,R.L., Miller,K.D., Wagle,N.K., & Jemal,A. Cancer statistics, 2023. CA 
Cancer J Clin 73, 17-48 (2023). 
 
2.      
Hellmann,M.D. et al. Nivolumab plus Ipilimumab in Lung Cancer with a 
High Tumor Mutational Burden. N. Engl. J Med. 378, 2093-2104 (2018). 
 
3.      
Padron,L.J. et al. Sotigalimab and/or nivolumab with chemotherapy in first-
line metastatic pancreatic cancer: clinical and immunologic analyses from the 
randomized phase 2 PRINCE trial. Nat. Med. 28, 1167-1177 (2022). 
 
4.      
Zhang,Y., Li,Z., Huang,Y., Zou,B., & Xu,Y. Amplifying cancer treatment: 
advances in tumor immunotherapy and nanoparticle-based hyperthermia. Front 
Immunol. 14, 1258786 (2023). 
 
5.      
Yonezawa,M. et al. Hyperthermia induces apoptosis in malignant fibrous 
histiocytoma cells in vitro. Int. J Cancer 66, 347-351 (1996). 
 
6.      
Harmon,B.V. et al. Cell death induced in a murine mastocytoma by 42-47 
degrees C heating in vitro: evidence that the form of death changes from apoptosis 
to necrosis above a critical heat load. Int. J Radiat. Biol. 58, 845-858 (1990). 
 
7.      
Zhang,Y. et al. Enhancement of CD8(+) T-Cell-Mediated Tumor 
Immunotherapy via Magnetic Hyperthermia. ChemMedChem. 17, e202100656 
(2022). 
 
8.      
Shibata,S. et al. Photo-immune therapy with liposomally formulated 
phospholipid-conjugated indocyanine green induces specific antitumor responses 
with heat shock protein-70 expression in a glioblastoma model. Oncotarget. 10, 
175-183 (2019). 
 
9.      
de Andrade,M.P. et al. Hyperthermia and associated changes in membrane 
fluidity potentiate P2X7 activation to promote tumor cell death. Oncotarget. 8, 
67254-67268 (2017). 
31 
 
 
10.      
Mikucki,M.E. et al. Preconditioning thermal therapy: flipping the switch on 
IL-6 for anti-tumour immunity. Int. J. Hyperthermia 29, 464-473 (2013). 
 
11.      
Yoshioka,A. et al. Effects of local hyperthermia on natural killer activity in 
mice. Int. J. Hyperthermia 6, 261-267 (1990). 
 
12.      
Redzovic,A. et al. Heat-Shock Proteins 70 Induce Pro-Inflammatory 
Maturation Program in Decidual CD1a+ Dendritic Cells. Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 74, 
38-53 (2015). 
 
13.      
Wachsberger,P.R. & Coss,R.A. Effects of hyperthermia on the cytoskeleton 
and cell survival in G1 and S phase Chinese hamster ovary cells. Int. J Hyperthermia 
6, 67-85 (1990). 
 
14.      
Cano-Mejia,J. et al. Prussian blue nanoparticle-based photothermal therapy 
combined with checkpoint inhibition for photothermal immunotherapy of 
neuroblastoma. Nanomedicine. 13, 771-781 (2017). 
 
15.      
Chen,Q. et al. Photothermal therapy with immune-adjuvant nanoparticles 
together with checkpoint blockade for effective cancer immunotherapy. Nat. 
Commun. 7, 13193 (2016). 
 
16.      
Hadadian,Y., Ramos,P., & Pavan,T.Z. Role of zinc substitution in magnetic 
hyperthermia properties of magnetite nanoparticles: interplay between intrinsic 
properties and dipolar interactions. Sci. Rep. 9, 18049 (2019). 
 
17.      
Lucaciu,C.M. et al. Enhanced Magnetic Hyperthermia Performance of Zinc 
Ferrite Nanoparticles under a Parallel and a Transverse Bias DC Magnetic Field. 
Nanomaterials. (Basel) 12, (2022). 
 
18.      
Mandal,A.K. et al. Current Research on Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles: Synthesis, 
Characterization, and Biomedical Applications. Nanomaterials. (Basel) 12, (2022). 
 
19.      
Jiang,J., Pi,J., & Cai,J. The Advancing of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles for 
Biomedical Applications. Bioinorg. Chem. Appl. 2018, 1062562 (2018). 
32 
 
 
20.      
Rasmussen,J.W., Martinez,E., Louka,P., & Wingett,D.G. Zinc oxide 
nanoparticles for selective destruction of tumor cells and potential for drug 
delivery applications. Expert. Opin. Drug Deliv. 7, 1063-1077 (2010). 
 
21.      
Mishra,P.K., Mishra,H., Ekielski,A., Talegaonkar,S., & Vaidya,B. Zinc oxide 
nanoparticles: a promising nanomaterial for biomedical applications. Drug Discov. 
Today 22, 1825-1834 (2017). 
 
22.      
Toro-Córdova,A., Llaguno-Munive,M., Jurado,R., & García-López,P. The 
Therapeutic Potential of Chemo/Thermotherapy with Magnetoliposomes for 
Cancer Treatment. Pharmaceutics 14, 2443 (2022). 
 
23.      
Garnier,B., Tan,S., Miraux,S., Bled,E., & Brisson,A.R. Optimized synthesis of 
100 nm diameter magnetoliposomes with high content of maghemite particles and 
high MRI effect. Contrast. Media Mol. Imaging 7, 231-239 (2012). 
 
24.      
Maron,E., Krysinski,P., & Chudy,M. Controlled Release of Doxorubicin from 
Magnetoliposomes Assisted by Low-Frequency Magnetic Field. Chem. Biodivers. 20, 
e202201079 (2023). 
 
25.      
Ashoori,F., Hajipour-Verdom,B., Satari,M., & Abdolmaleki,P. 
Polyethylenimine-based iron oxide nanoparticles enhance cisplatin toxicity in 
ovarian cancer cells in the presence of a static magnetic field. Front Oncol. 13, 
1217800 (2023). 
 
26.      
Calatayud,M.P. et al. Cell damage produced by magnetic fluid hyperthermia 
on microglial BV2 cells. Sci. Rep. 7, 8627 (2017). 
 
27.      
Fortin-Ripoche,J.P. et al. Magnetic targeting of magnetoliposomes to solid 
tumors with MR imaging monitoring in mice: feasibility. Radiology 239, 415-424 
(2006). 
 
28.      
Fizesan,I. et al. The Effect of Zn-Substitution on the Morphological, 
Magnetic, Cytotoxic, and In Vitro Hyperthermia Properties of Polyhedral Ferrite 
Magnetic Nanoparticles. Pharmaceutics 13, (2021). 
33 
 
 
29.      
Darzynkiewicz,Z. et al. Features of apoptotic cells measured by flow 
cytometry. Cytometry 13, 795-808 (1992). 
 
30.      
Koopman,G. et al. Annexin V for flow cytometric detection of 
phosphatidylserine expression on B cells undergoing apoptosis. Blood 84, 1415-
1420 (1994). 
 
31.      
Qi,L. et al. Advances in Toxicological Research of the Anticancer Drug 
Cisplatin. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 32, 1469-1486 (2019). 
 
32.      
Hall,R.R., Schade,R.O., & Swinney,J. Effects of hyperthermia on bladder 
cancer. Br. Med. J. 2, 593-594 (1974). 
 
33.      
Bahouth,Z., Halachmi,S., Moskovitz,B., & Nativ,O. The role of hyperthermia 
as a treatment for non-muscle invasive bladder cancer. Expert. Rev Anticancer 
Ther. 16, 189-198 (2016). 
 
34.      
Soria,F., Allasia,M., Oderda,M., & Gontero,P. Hyperthermia for non-muscle 
invasive bladder cancer. Expert. Rev Anticancer Ther. 16, 313-321 (2016). 
 
35.      
Matsushita,Y. et al. Comparative assessment of disease recurrence after 
transurethral resection of non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer with and without a 
photodynamic diagnosis using 5-aminolevulinic acid: a propensity score-matching 
analysis. Int. J. Clin. Oncol. 29, 205-212 (2024). 
 
36.      
Uren,R.F., Howman-Giles,R., & Thompson,J.F. Patterns of Lymphatic 
Drainage from the Skin in Patients with Melanoma. J Nucl Med 44, 570-582 (2003). 
 
37.      
Iyer,A.K., Khaled,G., Fang,J., & Maeda,H. Exploiting the enhanced 
permeability and retention effect for tumor targeting. Drug Discov. Today 11, 812-
818 (2006). 
 
38.      
Andrade,S. et al. Multi-Dose Intravenous Administration of Neutral and 
Cationic Liposomes in Mice: An Extensive Toxicity Study. Pharmaceuticals. (Basel) 
15, (2022). 
34 
 
 
39.      
Pradhan,P. et al. Targeted temperature sensitive magnetic liposomes for 
thermo-chemotherapy. J Control Release 142, 108-121 (2010). 
 
40.      
Alonso,J. et al. Superparamagnetic nanoparticles encapsulated in lipid vesicles 
for advanced magnetic hyperthermia and biodetection. J Appl Phys 119, 083904 
(2016). 
 
41.      
Shinkai,M. et al. Intracellular hyperthermia for cancer using magnetite 
cationic liposomes: in vitro study. Jpn. J Cancer Res. 87, 1179-1183 (1996). 
 
42.      
Toro-Cordova,A., Llaguno-Munive,M., Jurado,R., & Garcia-Lopez,P. The 
Therapeutic Potential of Chemo/Thermotherapy with Magnetoliposomes for 
Cancer Treatment. Pharmaceutics 14, (2022). 
 
43.      
Garcia-Hevia,L. et al. Magnetic lipid nanovehicles synergize the controlled 
thermal release of chemotherapeutics with magnetic ablation while enabling non-
invasive monitoring by MRI for melanoma theranostics. Bioact. Mater. 8, 153-164 
(2022). 
 
44.      
Chen,Y., Bose,A., & Bothun,G.D. Controlled release from bilayer-decorated 
magnetoliposomes via electromagnetic heating. ACS Nano. 4, 3215-3221 (2010). 
 
45.      
Amstad,E. et al. Triggered release from liposomes through magnetic 
actuation of iron oxide nanoparticle containing membranes. Nano. Lett. 11, 1664-
1670 (2011). 
 
46.      
Qiu,D. & An,X. Controllable release from magnetoliposomes by magnetic 
stimulation and thermal stimulation. Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces. 104, 326-329 
(2013). 
 
47.      
du Sert NP. et al. The ARRIVE guidelines 2.0: updated guidelines for 
reporting animal research. J Physiol 598, 3793-3801 (2020). 
 
48.      
Hatakeyama,M. et al. A two-step ligand exchange reaction generates highly 
water-dispersed magnetic nanoparticles for biomedical applications. J. Mater. 
Chem. 21, 5959-5966 (2011). 
35 
 
 
49.      
Adams,P.E. Determining Iron Content in Foods by Spectrophotometry. J. 
Chem. Educ. 72, 649-651 (1995). 
 
50.      
Basotra,M., Singh,S.K., & Gulati,M. Development and Validation of a Simple 
and Sensitive Spectrometric Method for Estimation of Cisplatin Hydrochloride in 
Tablet Dosage Forms: Application to Dissolution Studies. ISRN Analytical Chemistry 
2013, 936254 (2013). 
 
51.      
Steward,J.C.M. Colorimetric determination of phospholipids with 
ammonium ferrothiocyanate. Analytical Biochem. 104, 10-14 (1980). 
 
52.      
Ruiz-Ruiz,C. et al. An exopolysaccharide produced by the novel halophilic 
bacterium Halomonas stenophila strain B100 selectively induces apoptosis in 
human T leukaemia cells. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 89, 345-355 (2011). 
 
 
 
