1 
 
Evidence of epigenetic oncogenesis: a turning point in 
cancer research 
 
Jean-Pascal Capp 1, Benoît Aliaga 2 and Vera Pancaldi 2 
 
1 Toulouse Biotechnology Institute, INSA / University of Toulouse, CNRS, INRAE, 
Toulouse, France 
2 CRCT, Université de Toulouse, Inserm, CNRS, Université Toulouse III-Paul 
Sabatier, Centre de Recherches en Cancérologie de Toulouse, Toulouse, France  
 
Correspondence should be addressed to capp@insa-toulouse.fr and 
vera.pancaldi@inserm.fr 
 
 
2 
 
 
Abstract 
In cancer research, the term epigenetics was used in the 1970s in its modern sense 
encompassing non-genetic events modifying the chromatin state, mainly to oppose the 
emerging oncogene paradigm. However, starting from the establishment of this 
prominent concept, the importance of these epigenetic phenomena in cancer rarely led 
to questioning the causal role of genetic alterations. Only in the last 10 years, the 
accumulation of problematic data, better experimental technologies, and some 
ambitious models pushed the idea that epigenetics could be at least as important as 
genetics in early oncogenesis. Until this year, a direct demonstration of epigenetic 
oncogenesis was still lacking. Now Parreno, Cavalli and colleagues, using a refined 
experimental model in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, enforced the initiation of 
tumours solely by imposing a transient loss of Polycomb repression, leading to a purely 
epigenetic oncogenesis phenomenon. Despite a few caveats that we discuss, this 
pioneering work represents a major breakpoint in cancer research that leads us to 
consider the theoretical and conceptual implications on oncogenesis and to search for 
links between this artificial experimental model and naturally occurring processes, 
while revisiting cancer theories that were previously proposed as alternatives to the 
oncogene-centered paradigm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Introduction 
In 1935, Conrad Waddington suggested that cancers happen when cells have 
escaped from the action of normal growth-controlling agents, leading to a change in 
histological type and loss of their cellular identity [1].  According to his views, the 
developmental phenotype is the result of a complex, dynamic interaction between the 
developmental environment and the genome. To illustrate this complex phenomenon, 
he suggested a famous metaphor, the epigenetic landscape. It features a mountain 
leading to different valleys, in which differentiation of cells is represented by their rolling 
down into a specific valley, corresponding to a lineage. It is often used to pictorially 
describe the processes that we are discovering to be at the basis of cell differentiation 
and oncogenesis [2,3]. Actually, differentiation issues and changes in cellular identity 
have been noted for a very long time in cancer (the parallel between neoplasia and 
embryology is as old as the cell theory [4]). However, the molecular bases underlying 
these changes started to be deciphered only when the "modern" era of epigenetics 
began in 1975 [5]. 
 
A short history of cancer epigenetics 
In 1975, Robin Holliday [6] and Arthur Riggs [7] independently proposed that DNA 
modification by methylation could play a major role in gene expression during cell 
differentiation and embryonic development. Simultaneously, chromatin studies 
proliferated, describing the chromatin state at the level of single genes. What we now 
call 'epigenetic inheritance' is a state of chromatin, distinct from the DNA sequence, 
which is transmitted during cell division (Box 1). Two main classes of epigenetic events 
are transmitted: methylation of DNA and several modifications of histones, collectively 
known as the epigenetic landscape. Over the past four decades, alterations of these 
4 
 
phenomena have been implicated in carcinogenesis [8]. Apart from these heritable 
changes, chromatin remodeling, which is transient, is also important in oncogenesis 
[9,10]. Of note, both classes of events (heritable and transient) have been linked, 
particularly in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), where distinct epigenetic 
landscapes and nuclear architectures drive differentiation heterogeneity and allow 
PDAC classification into subtypes [11]. This potentially reveals an important structure-
function principle that directly or indirectly relates the epigenome to changes in gene 
expression levels and phenotypes [12] associated to malignancy. Finally, other non-
genetic events such as the transcription of coding and non-coding RNAs have been 
involved in cancer progression (Box 2) but not described as triggering factors. 
Over 4 decades ago, it was already noted that loss of methylation plays an 
important role in activating gene expression. In 1983, this 'hypomethylation' was the 
first epigenetic defect to be described in cancer cells by Feinberg and Vogelstein [13]. 
In 2004, Feinberg proposed a chronology in which he began the history of cancer 
epigenetics with this study [14]. However, as early as 1971, Kauffman expressed 
doubts about the genetic dimension that was beginning to gain ground, especially 
through the theory of oncogenic viruses. He focused on tumor reversion experiments 
that enabled him to speak of 'epigenetic cancer' [15]. In 1979, Holliday proposed a new 
theory of cancer that drew on his work on epigenetics in earlier years [16]. In particular, 
he mentioned the fact that certain substances well identified as carcinogenic were not 
necessarily mutagenic. Despite these results, even if epigenetic changes in somatic 
cells were highlighted, they were thought to be mainly secondary effects of the repair 
of DNA lesions caused by carcinogenic substances, fostering his primarily genetic 
vision.  
Similarly, the epigenetic research carried out by Feinberg and Vogelstein in the 
5 
 
early 1980s accompanied the development of the oncogene paradigm [17], without 
distancing itself from it [13,18,19]. Prehn suggested in 1994 that cancer phenotypes 
would rather result from aberrant or abnormal expression of genes driven by epigenetic 
mechanisms (in the broad sense) than from mutations [20]. Thus, it might be more 
accurate to say that ‘cancers beget mutations’ than to say that ‘mutations beget 
cancers’ [15]. This viewpoint was contrary to the prevailing theory of somatic mutations 
and other genetic theories, which postulate that a 'renegade' cell possessing specific 
genetic alterations such as mutations in certain oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes 
is sufficient for cancerous development. It was not until 12 years later that Feinberg 
finally championed the idea of an epigenetic model competing with the genetic initiation 
model [21], as epigenetic changes in progenitor cells began to be seen as alternatives 
to mutations and chromosomal alterations in the disruption of gene function. . However, 
the question of genes remained central, as these precursor modifications were thought 
to be due to a new category of genes, the tumor progenitor genes, which were thought 
to be malfunctioning in early steps.  
The link between genetic and epigenetic modifications was reinforced by the 
seminal discovery in the 2010s of mutations in chromatin remodelers that can be 
inactivated in a number of cancers [22]. However, these studies did not conceive 
epigenetic factors as initial and causal elements, as these deregulations are mutational 
in origin. Hanahan and Weinberg portrayed multistep tumor progression as a 
succession of clonal expansions, each of which is triggered by the chance acquisition 
of mutant genotypes [23]. Epigenetics was suggested to be one enabling characteristic 
that facilitates the acquisition of hallmark capabilities, especially because some of 
these mutations can be triggered by epigenetic changes affecting the regulation of 
gene expression. More recently, Hanahan [24] mentioned epigenetic dysregulation as 
6 
 
a mechanism responsible for tumor heterogeneity without invoking its role in 
oncogenesis. 
It was not until the second half of the 2010s that epigenetic alterations began to 
be considered in several models as an actual causal factor that could be at least as 
important as genetics for oncogenesis. It was first with the concept of constitutional 
epimutation [25], and then with the proposal that chromatin and epigenetic aberrations 
can confer the oncogenic properties necessary to induce tumorigenesis [26]. Genetic, 
environmental, and metabolic factors were suggested to make chromatin aberrantly 
permissive or restrictive. It was explicitly stated that ‘purely epigenetic mechanisms 
may explain tumors that arise with few or no recurrent mutations’ [26].  
 
Recent contributions of single-cell studies 
With the increasing availability of multiomics assays describing expression and 
chromatin accessibility, even in single-cells, studying the factors driving oncogenesis 
has become easier. In 2020, Marjanovic et al. [27] and Le Fave et al. [28] showed the 
emergence of a high plasticity state during lung cancer evolution in a genetically 
engineered mouse model using single-cell transcriptional and chromatin accessibility 
approaches, revealing important epigenomic alterations in early steps. They showed 
the loss of alveolar and lung-lineage identity as well as activation of Epithelial to 
Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) and embryonic endodermal and progenitor 
transcriptional profiles, thus identifying what they defined as a High Plasticity Cell State 
(HPCS) as a major transition point in tumour evolution. The HPCS showed high 
heterogeneity as well as an increase in proliferation potential and chemoresistance. A 
corresponding population was identified in human lung tumours. This and other 
examples show that tissue regeneration processes, in combination with oncogene 
7 
 
activation, can lead to high plasticity appearing quickly at early stages of 
carcinogenesis.  
More recently, Alonso Curbelo et al. [29] have studied similar mice models of 
pancreatic cancer showing that, in a KRAS mutated context, the presence of 
inflammation could divert tissue regeneration into malignancy. They also 
mechanistically proved that chromatin alterations on cell identity genes were involved 
in acinar to ductal metaplasia and the following inflammation induced de-differentiation 
that is part of normal tissue regeneration. They revealed a direct transition from acinar 
to neoplastic phenotypes and implicated a specific cytokine recapitulating the effect of 
injury as a trigger for pancreatic cancer development, thus reinforcing the importance 
of gene-environment interactions and epigenetics in early oncogenesis.  
Furthermore, a single-cell analysis of these processes, coupled with innovative 
computational methods, revealed details about how the chromatin accessibility 
alterations in early neoplasia can lead to tumour development involving altered inter-
cellular communication in the tissues [30]. Specifically, they observed that opening of 
chromatin in highly plastic states involved genomic regions that regulate genes 
important for communication, explaining a potential coupling between plasticity, 
inflammation and tissue remodeling that can lead to malignancy instead of 
regeneration. 
 Importantly, both these studies consider mice models that are produced by 
KRAS mutation, a well-known oncogene. The authors identified that this mutation 
produces high heterogeneity already in pre-malignant states, in some cases involving 
up-regulation of ZEB1 (associated with EMT) or of de-differentiation and 
developmental expression profiles, as well as oncogenic ones. The chromatin state in 
these different states could essentially prime some of these distinct cells already at 
8 
 
early stages for later transition to malignancy via environmental triggers (inflammation). 
 
The first direct evidence of epigenetic oncogenesis 
While these works investigated specific cancer models in mice, a single-cell atlas 
of chromatin accessibility alterations from normal to malignant was recently produced 
in patient samples across 11 cancer types [31]. The data show epigenetic changes 
modifying chromatin accessibility and genetic mutations within the same pathway 
across cancer types, suggesting that certain changes in chromatin accessibility might 
represent critical events of cancer initiation [31]. However, the ultimate demonstration 
that cancer can be induced solely by epigenetic phenomena in absence of oncogenic 
mutations was still lacking until the recent work from Parreno et al. [32].  
Since observing the initial stages of oncogenesis in mice models without 
oncogenic mutations still represents an enormous challenge, Parreno et al. considered 
a common model organism, the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, to study a potentially 
purely epigenetic oncogenesis phenomenon. They enforced the initiation of tumours 
solely by imposing a transient loss of Polycomb repression by inducible silencing of 
PRC1, removing a fundamental complex that represses developmentally regulated 
genes in differentiated cells [33]. Whereas most changes induced by this perturbation 
are transient, with de-repression of a considerable number of genomic regions, a few 
specific non-reversible changes are observed. These included activation of the 
ortholog of ZEB1 involved in EMT and of several components of the JAK-STAT 
pathway, potentially related to the de-repression of targets of the drosophila homolog 
of AP1. They also observed activation of the JNK signalling pathway, regulating 
response to external stimuli and bearing orthology relations to centralized stress 
response in yeast. These perturbations lead to the development of stable tumours. 
9 
 
Based on these results, the authors suggest a model according to which initial transient 
depletion of Polycomb repression leads to activation of the JAK-STAT pathway. This 
activation would mediate cell proliferation and the activation of an EMT process via the 
fly homolog of ZEB1, which prevents re-differentiation of the formed tumours. Since 
ZEB1 is known to induce EMT while stimulating DNA repair [34], one possibility is that 
its ectopic expression upon transient PRC1 depletion could contribute to tumorigenesis 
while preventing the accumulation of a high mutational burden. This might explain why 
Parreno and coworkers failed to detect increased mutation rates in their epigenetically 
initiated cancers. Interestingly, these tumours were also found to metastasize to distant 
regions, recapitulating a characteristic ability of tumours encountered in human 
cancers. 
There are a few points that need to be highlighted before considering what these 
results might imply for naturally occurring cancers. First, there are obviously some key 
differences between mammals including humans and flies, one important one being 
the absence of DNA methylation in the model organism. Despite the conservation of 
several epigenomic factors across species, it is possible that the loss of such a major 
mechanism for genome control affects drosophila’s ability to develop these tumours 
differently from what the scenario would be in mice or humans. Therefore, designing 
experiments that could produce at least initial evidence for (or against) the hypothesis 
that epigenetics can initiate cancer in mammals is required. Engineered systems 
allowing tissue-specific transient and reversible gene activation or inactivation via 
epigenetic editing [35] or RNA interference [36] could provide useful insight. Second, 
but not least important, this transient repression of Polycomb was obtained in a fairly 
artificial way. For these findings to have relevance in cancer, it would be fundamental 
to identify possible causes of a naturally occurring transient loss of Polycomb PRC1 
10 
 
complex functions (see below). 
Despite these few caveats, the work from Parreno, Cavalli and colleagues 
represents a major breakpoint in cancer research that encourages us to consider the 
theoretical and conceptual implications on the definition of oncogenesis. In the 
following, we will discuss relevant cancer theories that were previously proposed as 
alternatives to the oncogene-centered paradigm. 
 
Other examples of studies questioning the oncogene paradigm 
After decades of dominance of the oncogene paradigm, and thanks to 
adaptations of the paradigm with discoveries about the role of epigenetics and the 
microenvironment, cancer researchers still rarely acknowledge that genetic alterations 
may not be the initiating events in cancer. However, recent years have seen the 
accumulation of evidence deeply questioning this paradigm, especially the massive 
presence of oncogenic alterations in normal tissues challenges the causal importance 
of these mutations [37]. The increasing evidence suggests the importance of 
‘additional’ factors in oncogenesis [38], including environmental factors that would 
modulate clonal fate [39]. Thus, exposure to carcinogens such as cigarette smoke and 
pollutants, for instance, might favor the emergence of cancer as ‘promoting’ factors 
(see the well-known example on lung cancers by Swanton and colleagues [19]).  
Recently, analyzing colorectal cancer samples at several levels at single-cell 
resolution showed a fairly weak correlation between phenotypic and genetic 
heterogeneity [40,41]. This suggests that the epigenome could indeed be at least as 
important as genetic factors in determining the strong phenotypic heterogeneity and 
plasticity associated with cancer. These analyses on independent colorectal cancer 
clones revealed clear patterns of mutations in chromatin modifier genes as well as 
11 
 
chromatin accessibility alterations in regulatory regions of cancer driver genes. 
Interestingly, some of the epigenomic alterations involved potential activation of 
developmental genes via opening of regions bound by developmental regulators such 
as SOX and HOX family transcription factors (TFs). This is reminiscent of the 
alterations in Polycomb imposed in the Parreno et al. study. Furthermore, clonal 
alterations showed increased accessibility for JAK3 and in some cases regulation of 
SNAI TFs involved in EMT that were also identified in the fly epigenetic cancers 
described by Parreno et al. Finally, by comparing samples from the same or different 
tumours from the same patient, that include cells that are several cell divisions apart, 
they were also able to confirm that these epigenomic alterations are stable and 
heritable. 
Several hypotheses have been proposed to explain the emergence of cancer 
through the modulation of the competitive fitness of mutant clones by environmental 
factors such as the metabolic context (closely linked to diet) or inflammation [42]. 
However, despite the ‘missing links between clonal expansion and cancer 
transformation’ [37], the necessary pre-existence of mutations has very rarely been 
called into question. Thus, it appeared for 10 years that somatic mutations are not 
sufficient to trigger oncogenesis without other alterations of non-genetic origin. Cavalli 
and colleagues’ work now demonstrates that they are neither sufficient, nor necessary. 
Epigenetic events alone can be the triggering events. 
 
What can cause epigenetic alterations able to induce cancers?  
Considering the works cited above, we can imagine several scenarios that might 
lead to such a transient alteration of Polycomb repression. For instance, epigenetics-
centered toxicological studies will be needed to provide new insights over the 
12 
 
oncogenic role of non-mutagenic chemical substances in altering Polycomb regulation. 
Knowing the intimate relationships between metabolism and epigenetics [43], the role 
of dietary and metabolic changes will also of prime importance. More generally, an 
activation of stress responses in healthy tissues in the presence of strong inflammation 
leading to the activation of similar phenotypes as those described by Parreno et al. 
might be relevant. But more radically, the turning point that is the work of Parreno et 
al. should encourage us to consider the relationships between chromatin dynamics 
and tissue architecture and homeostasis.  
Previous models and theories already suggested that disruption of tissue 
homeostasis alone can induce cancer. They are based for instance on works showing 
that genetic alterations in the hematopoietic stem cell niche can induce leukemia from 
healthy transplanted cells [44-46]. But once the tissue is disrupted, there is a 
disagreement over the underlying mechanisms.  
A very radical position, known as the Tissue Organization Field Theory (TOFT) 
consists in proposing that the cell state by default is proliferation and that tissue 
organization allows control of this proliferation. It considers that the right level to explain 
the cancerous phenomenon is higher than the cellular one, namely that of biological 
organization and cellular communication in tissues. It posits that only the release of 
these tissue constraints can explain cancer [47]. In the TOFT, cell-centered processes 
are negligible and cannot explain cancer development. In this perspective, Parreno’s 
works are hardly understandable, except if the epigenetic disorders caused by 
Polycomb inactivation create a massive disruption of the expression of proteins 
involved in cell interactions and communications. Of note, the results of Burdziak et al. 
[30] also pointed to the central role of ligands and receptor module expression in early 
carcinogenesis. It supported the importance of tissue organization and inter-cellular 
13 
 
communication alterations, albeit in the context of an oncogenic mutation. 
The pioneering studies of Mina Bissell on breast cancer highlighted the role of 
the extracellular matrix (ECM) and its interrelationships with the cells inside the tissue, 
as well as the carcinogenic importance of the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) that 
degrade the ECM. However, loss of adhesion caused by MMPs were proposed to 
attenuate DNA damage response and thus cause loss of genomic surveillance 
mechanisms and DNA damage-induced genomic instability [48]. Regarding the 
molecular pathways and mutations likely to cause disruption of breast tissue 
architecture, the role of mutated P53 was still emphasized [49]. Thus, a purely non-
genetic view of cancer initiation was hardly privileged. Several experimental results 
pointed to an initiator/promoter model first proposed by Berenblum [50] and recently 
re-discovered [51] according to which it can be argued that healthy mutant cells are 
pre-existing and able to start malignant transformation in case of microenvironmental 
perturbation. These concepts have gained ground to explain how common 
carcinogens did not produce expected mutational signatures [52]. Nevertheless, it 
must be noted that this paradigm still allows us to consider genetic alterations as the 
ultimate origin of cancer [51]. 
Physical and biomechanical factors [53], which can play a role in changes to the 
extra-cellular matrix, and the disruption of cell-cell interactions [54], were also pointed 
out as causal events by proponents of the theory of attractors. Here, following such 
disruption, cells corresponding to healthy cell types and “normal” attractor states in the 
global gene regulatory network would be destabilized enough to reach pathological 
cancer attractors. These attractor states are not supposed to be reached during tissue 
development or renewal [55]. However, this network-centered view remains relatively 
elusive when searching for specific molecular events leading to such destabilization, 
14 
 
warranting further studies.  
Initial disruption of cell interactions and tissue homeostasis were also proposed 
to cause a global increase (from differentiated cells) or an uncontrolled maintenance 
(from adult stem cells) of cellular stochasticity [56-59]. The subsequent phenotypic 
plasticity would be due to the destabilized chromatin states and increased gene 
expression noise caused by dysregulated signaling pathways. This hypothesis is 
entirely compatible with the causative chain of events described above, linking 
mechanical or biochemical disruption in the microenvironment and the release of 
Polycomb from the chromatin. These events could potentially lead to a more 
widespread and stochastic gene expression.  
Recently the main Polycomb component EZH2 was implicated in controlling lung 
fibrosis and epithelial remodeling after injury via a newly discovered transcriptional 
complex, which might constitute an alteration of Polycomb binding similar to that 
introduced by Parreno et al. [60]. An older study had identified EZH2 as key to 
preserving memory of mechanical perturbations in mesenchymal stem cells [61]. 
Mechanical impacts on transcriptional regulation were shown to impact Polycomb-
mediated gene silencing. In melanoma, mechanical constraints during cell migration 
were shown to affect cellular plasticity and phenotypic switches via regulation of 
chromatin factors [62], with mechanisms which are reminiscent of neuronal 
development. Generally, there are strong links between cellular mechanical stimulation 
or environment and chromatin regulation [61]. This suggests that disruption of tissue 
homeostasis or mechanics could be sufficient to trigger Polycomb alterations driving 
epigenetic cancers.  
 
Conclusion 
15 
 
In summary, the globally accepted viewpoint on oncogenesis is currently slowly 
shifting [63] and Parreno’s study should accelerate this trend. It constitutes a turning 
point, even if we discussed that previous contributions in the field already suggested 
such a causal role of epigenetics. Future studies will be required to clarify the many 
ways by which initial epigenetic alterations can be acquired at a sufficient level to start 
transformation and the precise threshold needed. Investigations over the relationships 
with microenvironmental factors and the molecular consequences at the chromatin 
level that may destabilize cells enough to produce cell transformation without gene 
mutation will also help consolidating this new perspective on oncogenesis.  While the 
estimation of carcinogenic potential of several substances is currently based on 
whether they induce DNA mutations, it might be necessary to also consider the effect 
of compounds on chromatin to capture potentially non-genetic carcinogens to improve 
cancer prevention. Moreover, the well-known effects of aging on the epigenome and 
chromatin structure, potentially affecting cellular plasticity, could help identify new 
modes of age-dependent increase in cancer risk, beyond the accumulation of DNA 
mutations. Finally, other non-genetic events beyond those directly affecting chromatin 
structure (such as metabolism or non-coding RNA production) should be considered 
in future studies as potential triggering factors in oncogenesis.  
 
Acknowledgements 
V.P. acknowledges funding from the ARC foundation via the TRANSCAN SCIE-PANC 
project.  
Author contributions 
J.-P.C., B.A. and V.P. collectively wrote the manuscript.  
16 
 
 
Competing interests 
None. 
 
Data availability 
Not applicable as this is a “Recently in Press” article. 
17 
 
References 
1 
Waddington CH. 1935. Cancer and the Theory of Organisers. Nature 135: 606-
8. 
2 
Banerji CR, Miranda-Saavedra D, Severini S, Widschwendter M, et al. 2013. 
Cellular network entropy as the energy potential in Waddington's differentiation 
landscape. Sci Rep 3: 3039. 
3 
Marie KL, Merlino G, Day CP. 2022. The Hitchhiker's Guide across a 
Waddington's landscape of melanoma. Dev Cell 57: 2447-9. 
4 
Capp JP. 2019. Cancer Stem Cells: From Historical Roots to a New 
Perspective. J Oncol 2019: 5189232. 
5 
Nicoglou A, Merlin F. 2017. Epigenetics: A way to bridge the gap between 
biological fields. Stud Hist Philos Biol Biomed Sci 66: 73-82. 
6 
Holliday R, Pugh JE. 1975. DNA modification mechanisms and gene activity 
during development. Science 187: 226-32. 
7 
Riggs AD. 1975. X inactivation, differentiation, and DNA methylation. Cytogenet 
Cell Genet 14: 9-25. 
8 
Lee JE, Kim MY. 2022. Cancer epigenetics: Past, present and future. Semin 
Cancer Biol 83: 4-14. 
9 
Clapier CR, Iwasa J, Cairns BR, Peterson CL. 2017. Mechanisms of action 
and regulation of ATP-dependent chromatin-remodelling complexes. Nat Rev 
Mol Cell Biol 18: 407-22. 
10 
Danieli A, Papantonis A. 2020. Spatial genome architecture and the 
emergence of malignancy. Hum Mol Genet 29: R197-R204. 
11 
Lomberk G, Blum Y, Nicolle R, Nair A, et al. 2018. Distinct epigenetic 
landscapes underlie the pathobiology of pancreatic cancer subtypes. Nat 
Commun 9: 1978. 
18 
 
12 
Pancaldi V. 2021. Chromatin Network Analyses: Towards Structure-Function 
Relationships in Epigenomics. Front Bioinform 1: 742216. 
13 
Feinberg AP, Vogelstein B. 1983. Hypomethylation distinguishes genes of 
some human cancers from their normal counterparts. Nature 301: 89-92. 
14 
Feinberg AP, Tycko B. 2004. The history of cancer epigenetics. Nat Rev 
Cancer 4: 143-53. 
15 
Kauffman S. 1971. Differentiation of malignant to benign cells. J Theor Biol 31: 
429-51. 
16 
Holliday R. 1979. A new theory of carcinogenesis. Br J Cancer 40: 513-22. 
17 
Morange M. 1997. From the regulatory vision of cancer to the oncogene 
paradigm, 1975-1985. J Hist Biol 30: 1-29. 
18 
Feinberg AP, Vogelstein B. 1983. Hypomethylation of ras oncogenes in 
primary human cancers. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 111: 47-54. 
19 
Goelz SE, Vogelstein B, Hamilton SR, Feinberg AP. 1985. Hypomethylation 
of DNA from benign and malignant human colon neoplasms. Science 228: 187-
90. 
20 
Prehn RT. 1994. Cancers beget mutations versus mutations beget cancers. 
Cancer Res 54: 5296-300. 
21 
Feinberg AP, Ohlsson R, Henikoff S. 2006. The epigenetic progenitor origin 
of human cancer. Nat Rev Genet 7: 21-33. 
22 
Skulte KA, Phan L, Clark SJ, Taberlay PC. 2014. Chromatin remodeler 
mutations in human cancers: epigenetic implications. Epigenomics 6: 397-414. 
23 
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. 2011. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. 
Cell 144: 646-74. 
24 
Hanahan D. 2022. Hallmarks of Cancer: New Dimensions. Cancer Discov 12: 
19 
 
31-46. 
25 
Hitchins MP. 2015. Constitutional epimutation as a mechanism for cancer 
causality and heritability? Nature Reviews Cancer 15: 625-34. 
26 
Flavahan WA, Gaskell E, Bernstein BE. 2017. Epigenetic plasticity and the 
hallmarks of cancer. Science 357. 
27 
Marjanovic ND, Hofree M, Chan JE, Canner D, et al. 2020. Emergence of a 
High-Plasticity Cell State during Lung Cancer Evolution. Cancer Cell 38: 229-
46 e13. 
28 
LaFave LM, Kartha VK, Ma S, Meli K, et al. 2020. Epigenomic State 
Transitions Characterize Tumor Progression in Mouse Lung Adenocarcinoma. 
Cancer Cell 38: 212-28 e13. 
29 
Alonso-Curbelo D, Ho YJ, Burdziak C, Maag JLV, et al. 2021. A gene-
environment-induced epigenetic program initiates tumorigenesis. Nature 590: 
642-8. 
30 
Burdziak C, Alonso-Curbelo D, Walle T, Reyes J, et al. 2023. Epigenetic 
plasticity 
cooperates 
with 
cell-cell 
interactions 
to 
direct 
pancreatic 
tumorigenesis. Science 380: eadd5327. 
31 
Terekhanova NV, Karpova A, Liang WW, Strzalkowski A, et al. 2023. 
Epigenetic regulation during cancer transitions across 11 tumour types. Nature 
623: 432-41. 
32 
Parreno V, Loubiere V, Schuettengruber B, Fritsch L, et al. 2024. Transient 
loss of Polycomb components induces an epigenetic cancer fate. Nature 629: 
688-96. 
33 
Schuettengruber B, Bourbon HM, Di Croce L, Cavalli G. 2017. Genome 
Regulation by Polycomb and Trithorax: 70 Years and Counting. Cell 171: 34-57. 
20 
 
34 
Morel AP, Ginestier C, Pommier RM, Cabaud O, et al. 2017. A stemness-
related ZEB1-MSRB3 axis governs cellular pliancy and breast cancer genome 
stability. Nat Med 23: 568-78. 
35 
Goell JH, Hilton IB. 2021. CRISPR/Cas-Based Epigenome Editing: Advances, 
Applications, and Clinical Utility. Trends Biotechnol 39: 678-91. 
36 
Zhou Y, Sheng P, Li J, Li Y, et al. 2024. Conditional RNA interference in 
mammalian cells via RNA transactivation. Nat Commun 15: 6855. 
37 
Wijewardhane N, Dressler L, Ciccarelli FD. 2021. Normal Somatic Mutations 
in Cancer Transformation. Cancer Cell 39: 125-9. 
38 
Chanock SJ. 2018. The paradox of mutations and cancer. Science 362: 893-4. 
39 
Rahal Z, Scheet P, Kadara H. 2024. Somatic Mutations in Normal Tissues: 
Calm before the Storm. Cancer Discovery 14: 605-9. 
40 
Househam J, Heide T, Cresswell GD, Spiteri I, et al. 2022. Phenotypic 
plasticity and genetic control in colorectal cancer evolution. Nature 611: 744-53. 
41 
Heide T, Househam J, Cresswell GD, Spiteri I, et al. 2022. The co-evolution 
of the genome and epigenome in colorectal cancer. Nature 611: 733-43. 
42 
Herms A, Jones PH. 2023. Somatic Mutations in Normal Tissues: New 
Perspectives on Early Carcinogenesis. Annual Review of Cancer Biology 7: 
189-205. 
43 
Dai Z, Ramesh V, Locasale JW. 2020. The evolving metabolic landscape of 
chromatin biology and epigenetics. Nat Rev Genet 21: 737-53. 
44 
Walkley CR, Olsen GH, Dworkin S, Fabb SA, et al. 2007. A microenvironment-
induced myeloproliferative syndrome caused by retinoic acid receptor gamma 
deficiency. Cell 129: 1097-110. 
45 
Raaijmakers MH, Mukherjee S, Guo S, Zhang S, et al. 2010. Bone progenitor 
21 
 
dysfunction induces myelodysplasia and secondary leukaemia. Nature 464: 
852-7. 
46 
Kode A, Manavalan JS, Mosialou I, Bhagat G, et al. 2014. Leukaemogenesis 
induced by an activating beta-catenin mutation in osteoblasts. Nature 506: 240-
4. 
47 
Soto AM, Sonnenschein C. 2011. The tissue organization field theory of 
cancer: a testable replacement for the somatic mutation theory. Bioessays 33: 
332-40. 
48 
Radisky DC, Bissell MJ. 2006. Matrix metalloproteinase-induced genomic 
instability. Curr Opin Genet Dev 16: 45-50. 
49 
Freed-Pastor WA, Mizuno H, Zhao X, Langerod A, et al. 2012. Mutant p53 
disrupts mammary tissue architecture via the mevalonate pathway. Cell 148: 
244-58. 
50 
Berenblum I, Shubik P. 1947. A new, quantitative, approach to the study of the 
stages of chemical cartinogenesis in the mouse's skin. Br J Cancer 1: 383-91. 
51 
Balmain A. 2020. The critical roles of somatic mutations and environmental 
tumor-promoting agents in cancer risk. Nat Genet 52: 1139-43. 
52 
Riva L, Pandiri AR, Li YR, Droop A, et al. 2020. The mutational signature 
profile of known and suspected human carcinogens in mice. Nat Genet 52: 
1189-97. 
53 
Huang S, Ingber DE. 2005. Cell tension, matrix mechanics, and cancer 
development. Cancer Cell 8: 175-6. 
54 
Kaneko K. 2011. Characterization of stem cells and cancer cells on the basis 
of gene expression profile stability, plasticity, and robustness: dynamical 
systems theory of gene expressions under cell-cell interaction explains 
22 
 
mutational robustness of differentiated cells and suggests how cancer cells 
emerge. Bioessays 33: 403-13. 
55 
Huang S, Ernberg I, Kauffman S. 2009. Cancer attractors: a systems view of 
tumors from a gene network dynamics and developmental perspective. Semin 
Cell Dev Biol 20: 869-76. 
56 
Capp JP. 2005. Stochastic gene expression, disruption of tissue averaging 
effects and cancer as a disease of development. Bioessays 27: 1277-85. 
57 
Capp JP. 2017. Tissue disruption increases stochastic gene expression thus 
producing tumors: Cancer initiation without driver mutation. International journal 
of cancer 140: 2408-13. 
58 
Capp JP, Bataille R. 2020. Multiple Myeloma as a Bone Disease? The Tissue 
Disruption-Induced Cell Stochasticity (TiDiS) Theory. Cancers 12. 
59 
Capp JP, Thomas F. 2021. Tissue-disruption-induced cellular stochasticity and 
epigenetic drift: Common origins of aging and cancer? Bioessays 43: e2000140. 
60 
Le HQ, Hill MA, Kollak I, Keck M, et al. 2021. An EZH2-dependent 
transcriptional complex promotes aberrant epithelial remodelling after injury. 
EMBO Rep 22: e52785. 
61 
Miroshnikova YA, Cohen I, Ezhkova E, Wickstrom SA. 2019. Epigenetic 
gene regulation, chromatin structure, and force-induced chromatin remodelling 
in epidermal development and homeostasis. Curr Opin Genet Dev 55: 46-51. 
62 
Hunter MV, Montal E, Ma Y, Moncada R, et al. 2024. Mechanical confinement 
governs phenotypic plasticity in melanoma. bioRxiv: 2024.01.30.577120. 
63 
Ciriello G, Magnani L, Aitken SJ, Akkari L, et al. 2024. Cancer Evolution: A 
Multifaceted Affair. Cancer Discov 14: 36-48. 
64 
Bonasio R, Tu S, Reinberg D. 2010. Molecular signals of epigenetic states. 
23 
 
Science 330: 612-6. 
65 
Cerneckis J, Ming GL, Song H, He C, et al. 2024. The rise of 
epitranscriptomics: recent developments and future directions. Trends 
Pharmacol Sci 45: 24-38. 
66 
Deng X, Qing Y, Horne D, Huang H, et al. 2023. The roles and implications of 
RNA m(6)A modification in cancer. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 20: 507-26. 
67 
Zhang X, Xu X, Song J, Xu Y, et al. 2023. Non-coding RNAs' function in cancer 
development, diagnosis and therapy. Biomed Pharmacother 167: 115527. 
68 
Lan Y, Liu B, Guo H. 2021. The role of M(6)A modification in the regulation of 
tumor-related lncRNAs. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids 24: 768-79. 
69 
Yi YC, Chen XY, Zhang J, Zhu JS. 2020. Novel insights into the interplay 
between m(6)A modification and noncoding RNAs in cancer. Mol Cancer 19: 
121. 
 
 
 
24 
 
Box 1: The different carriers of epigenetic information 
 
Since Waddington's definition of epigenetics, many publications have focused on its role in 
molecular biology, genetics, and development. Nowadays, epigenetic refers to a heritable, self-
perpetuating, and reversible system [64]. Epigenetic regulation of gene expression will 
facilitate organisms' adaptation to changing environments. Today, there are three mechanisms 
of epigenetic information carriers: DNA methylation, post-translational modifications of 
histones, and non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs). These mechanisms are mediated by enzymes, 
which are classified into three groups: writers, readers, and erasers. Writers put an epigenetic 
mark on the histone tails or the DNA (5-methyl-cytosine) or on RNA (m6A). For example, DNA 
methyltransferases (DNMTs) are enzymes that are capable of transferring a methyl group from 
the substrate S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet) to a 5-methyl-cytosine (5mC). Readers 
detect this epigenetic mark and contribute to the transcriptional machinery. The class of 
enzymes involved in DNA methylation is represented by the MBD (Methyl-CpG Binding 
Domain) family. Erasers remove these marks. For example, 5mC can be modified to thymine 
by AID/APOBEC enzymes, which will, in turn, be further modified to cytosine by the Thymine 
DNA Glycosylase mechanism.  
 
 
25 
 
Box 2: Role of coding and non-coding RNAs in cancer  
 
RNA biology is a fast-evolving field, and recent decades have seen numerous breakthroughs 
in oncology. Firstly, it has been known since the 1950s that RNA molecules are decorated with 
modified nucleotides or RNA modifications. Nevertheless, the absence of methods to detect 
and map RNA modifications in low-abundance RNAs, along with the unclear functional 
significance of these modifications, had left the field of epitranscriptomics inactive for several 
decades [65]. This situation changed with the development of high-throughput sequencing. 
One of the most well-studied RNA modifications is N6-methyladenosine (m6A), which is the 
most prevalent modification found in eukaryotic mRNA. m6A has been implicated in cancer 
development and progression, with dysregulated m6A modification patterns associated with 
poor prognosis in several types of cancer (reviewed in [66]). Secondly, biologists initially 
thought that 90% of our genome was made up of "junk DNA," as much of it was transcribed 
into non-protein-coding RNA. This vision has progressively changed, revealing that most of 
the human genome is transcribed into RNAs that do not encode proteins (ncRNAs). In cancer, 
ncRNAs work as oncogenes or tumor suppressors to regulate carcinogenesis and progression. 
They influence cancer development by modulating various signaling pathways. These 
pathways include mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), Wnt, Notch, and Hedgehog 
signaling. Additionally, ncRNAs impact Hippo signaling and the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway [67]. 
More interestingly, coding and ncRNAs interact together. Indeed, m6A regulatory factors 
participate in the regulation of tumors through ncRNAs through microRNA (miRNA), circRNA 
and lncRNAs [68]. On the other hand, ncRNAs (lncRNAs, miRNAs, and circRNAs) participate 
in the regulation of tumors through m6A regulatory factors [69]. 
