1 
 
 
Impact of Normal Lung Volume Choices on Radiation Pneumonitis 
Risk Prediction in Locally Advanced NSCLC Radiotherapy 
 
 
Alyssa Gadsby, MS, Tian Liu, PhD, Robert Samstein, MD, Jiahan Zhang, PhD, Yang Lei, PhD, 
Kenneth E. Rosenzweig, MD, Ming Chao, PhD* 
 
Department of Radiation Oncology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 
 
 
*Corresponding Author: Ming Chao, PhD 
Email: ming.chao@mountsinai.org 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Abstract 
Purpose/Objectives: To evaluate the impact of different normal lung volumes on radiation 
pneumonitis (RP) prediction in patients with locally advanced non-small-cell-lung-cancer (LA-
NSCLC) receiving radiotherapy. 
Materials and Methods: Three dosimetric variables (V20, V5, and mean lung dose (MLD)) were 
calculated using treatment plans from 442 patients with LA-NSCLC enrolled in NRG Oncology 
RTOG 0617. Three lung volumes were defined based on the treatment plan: total lung excluding 
gross-tumor-target (TL-GTV), total lung excluding clinical-target-volume (TL-CTV), and total lung 
excluding planning-target-volume (TL-PTV). Binary classification was used for clinical endpoints: 
“no-RP2” (N = 377) for patients with acute RP grades 0 or 1, and “RP2” (N = 65) for patients with 
acute grades 2 or higher. The impact of lung volume definition on RP prediction was investigated 
with statistical analyses including the variance test, Mann-Whitney U test, and univariate regression, 
together with two supervised machine learning (ML) models: logistic regression (LR) and random 
forest (RF). Balanced data was generated for comparison to prediction obtained with the imbalanced 
data. Areas under curve (AUCs) and the Shapley Additive eXplanations (SHAP) were used to 
examine ML performance and explain feature’s contribution to the prediction, respectively. 
Results: Statistical analyses revealed that V20 and MLD were associated with RP but no difference 
among different lung volume definitions. Mean AUC values from 10-fold cross validation using 
imbalanced and balanced datasets were < 0.6 except that RF from the latter dataset yielded AUC 
values > 0.7. SHAP values indicated that MLD and V20 were the most prominent features in RP 
prediction. In all assessments, no difference among various volume definitions was found. 
Conclusion: While V20 and MLD showed association with RP, different lung volumes showed 
insignificant impact on RP prediction. Low AUC values suggest limited effectiveness of these 
dosimetric variables in predicting RP risk and more powerful predictors are needed. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
1 
Introduction 
Treatment-induced lung injury such as radiation pneumonitis (RP) poses serious limitations to the 
efficacy of radiotherapy (RT). Grade 2 or greater RP (RP2) is a major obstacle to the following 
consolidative immunotherapy, a standard care for patients with stage III non-small-cell-lung-cancer 
(NSCLC). Accurately predicting which patients will develop RP is crucial on preventing or 
intervening prior to onset of symptoms or to prepare for the subsequent treatment. Dosimetric 
parameters such as V20 (lung volume receiving > 20 Gy) and mean lung dose (MLD) are commonly 
used for risk reduction when evaluating RT treatment plans. Their values depend on the normal lung 
volume definition but no consensus is reached among different institutions. In the era of three-
dimensional conformal radiotherapy (3D-CRT), the normal lung volume was defined as the bilateral 
lung excluding the planning target volume (PTV) [1]. In RTOG 0617, it was defined as the bilateral 
lung volume excluding the clinical target volume (CTV) [2]. However, recent clinical trials such as 
RTOG 0618/0813/0915/1106 and ESTRO-ACROP guidelines recommended using the lung volume 
excluding gross tumor volume (GTV) [3]. Compared to 3D-CRT, intensity modulated radiation 
therapy (IMRT) technique has become the preferred technique in treating NSCLC, with which 
significant variations of dosimetric parameters among different lung volume definitions are expected 
owing to non-standard dose distribution outside the target.  
There have been some studies of the effect of normal lung volume definition on RP prediction. A 
study based on four lung volumes using 100 patients with stage I-III NSCLC showed that the 
differences in MLD and V20 were significant from different lung definitions and MLD from the GTV 
exclusion might be more accurate in predicting RP [4]. Another study using 183 lung cancer patients 
treated with IMRT compared RP prediction performance using V5 (lung volume receiving > 5Gy), 
V20, and MLD from three lung volume definitions [5]. They found considerable differences using 
dosimetric parameters from various lung definitions and excluding PTV from total lung volume might 
be more accurate in RP prediction. Most recently, a study [6] analyzed 117 patients with stage III 
NSCLC treated with chemotherapy concurrent or sequential volumetric modulated arc therapy 
(VMAT) indicated that MLD from the GTV exclusion method might be more predictive of RP2, 
consistent with [4]. 
The key takeaway from these studies is the lack of consensus again on which volume definition best 
predicts the RP risk. Additionally, these studies apparently suffered from inadequate data, preventing 
definitive conclusions. Furthermore, all datasets were imbalanced, yet no measures were taken to 
address the issue, which could lead to statistical inaccuracies. Lastly, the previous analyses relied 
4 
solely on logistic regression models that may not fully capture the insights from the dataset. 
Consequently, we believe it is important to conduct further research using comprehensive methods 
and larger datasets to address the limitations of previous studies. In this work, we analyze data from 
the publicly available RTOG 0617 trial, which included over 500 patients with locally advanced 
NSCLC. We also implemented strategies to balance the dataset, thereby mitigating issues related the 
data imbalance. To enhance our understanding of how each feature influences RP prediction, we 
utilized SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) to interpret the outputs of machine learning models. 
2 
Materials & Methods 
2.1 
Patient Data Preparation 
A subset of 442 patients were selected for this study from 544 patients enrolled in RTOG 0617 by 
excluding those with incomplete data [2, 7]. All patient data including tabulated data in several 
spreadsheet files, data dictionaries, planning CT, RT structure, and dose were downloaded from The 
Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA) [8] with permission. RP grades, particularly acute grades were used 
in this analysis. A binary classification was adopted for the clinical endpoints: “no-RP2” (N = 377) 
for patients with acute RP grades 0 or 1, and “RP2” (N = 65) for patients with acute grades 2 or 
higher. The planning CT images, RT structures, and RT doses for all patients were exported into an 
open source software platform CERR [9] and were converted into MATLAB® (MathWorks, Natick, 
MA) format files for data mining. Three lung structures were created with CERR if any does not 
exist. These three structures are defined as bilateral or total lung (TL) volume excluding the gross 
tumor volume (TL-GTV), the TL volume excluding the clinical target volume (TL-CTV), and the TL 
volume excluding the planning target volume (TL-PTV), respectively. Three sets of three dosimetric 
variables MLD, V5, V20 were calculated based on three lung volumes and exported for the 
subsequent statistical analysis and machine learning prediction studies, together with the binary 
endpoint data. 
2.2 
Statistical Analysis 
Three statistical analysis methods were used to reveal correlations between RP, lung volumes, and 
dosimetric variables. They include the repeated analysis of variance test (ANOVA), Mann-Whitney 
U test, and univariate logistic regression. To prepare the data and check the statistical capabilities, 
Shapiro-Wilk test was applied to verify the statistical suitability of V5, V20, and MLD distributions 
that were extracted for each of the three lung volumes. The test confirms suitability by examining if 
the variable is normally distributed. ANOVA provides insight into differences (statistical variance) 
5 
between groups of data. The Mann-Whitney U test determines differences in V5, V20, and MLD 
variables with a dependence on non-RP2 and RP2 definitions. Univariate logistic regression was used 
to find connections between RP and each of V5, V20, and MLD separately.  
2.3 Machine Learning Prediction and SHAP Explanation  
The effect of the lung volumes on RP prediction was further investigated with two supervised machine 
learning (ML) models taking MLD, V5, and V20 as inputs: logistic regression (LR) and random forest 
(RF) using the scikit-learn library with Python v3.8.10. The entire dataset was split according to the 
80:20 scheme where 80% of data was reserved for model training and validation while 20% was for 
testing. Prior to model training and validation, these models underwent hyper-parameter tuning with 
five-fold cross-validation using grid search based on the training dataset [10]. The performance for 
each ML model was assessed with the area under the curve (AUC) of the receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) from ten-fold cross validation using the training data. 
The original dataset was seriously imbalanced, which could compromise the ML model performance. 
To mitigate class imbalance, we utilized a technique called synthetic minority over-sampling 
technique (SMOTE) [11] to increase the minority (RP2) group up to 30% of the majority group. In 
the meantime, we under-sampled the majority (non-RP2) group so that majority-minority ratio 
became 5:4. This way we ensured that SMOTE not overpopulate the minority group with artificial 
data. The same ML training and validation procedure repeated. Comparison was made between the 
results obtained with the resampled balanced dataset and those from the original imbalanced dataset. 
To understand how each dosimetric variable influences machine learning based RP2 prediction, we 
utilized a technique of SHAP (Shapley Additive exPlanations) [12]. SHAP values assign a numerical 
value to each variable/feature in a model, showing how much that feature affects the model’s 
prediction for a given data point. They can also show the significance of each feature compared to 
others, and, how much the model relies on interactions between features. 
3 
Results 
Shapiro-Wilk tests reveal that V5 follow a quasi-normal distribution while V20 and MLD both follow 
a normal distribution (plots included in the Appendix), confirming their statistical suitability. ANOVA 
tests yield notable statistic differences between V20 and MLD but V5 is not between either of the 
two lung volumes (Fig. 1a). F-statistics are significantly larger for both V20 and MLD than for V5, 
indicating that V5 is not significantly different among different lung volumes. The p-values are 
consistent with this observation. Mann-Whitney U tests exhibit an explicit statistical difference 
6 
between RP2 and non-RP2 for V20 and MLD, but not for V5 again (Fig 1b), meaning that the 
displayed statistic would be greater than critical values for V20 and MLD but not for V5 (p-value > 
0.05). Univariate logistic regression (Fig. 2c) reports a relationship between the dosimetric variables 
in descending order: V20, MLD, and V5 as seen with the decrease in odds ratio, indicating that V20 
has the highest odds of predicting an outcome and V5 is the least predictive quantity (p-value > 0.05 
again). This analysis also shows independence of RP correlation from the lung volume definitions 
since the odd ratio is comparable for each of the dosimetric variables.     
 
Figure 2 depicts the ROC curves and lists AUC values obtained from 10-fold cross validation of two 
supervised ML models based on the original imbalanced and the resampled balanced datasets, 
respectively. Logistic regression (Fig. 2a) has shown similar performance as random forest (Fig. 2b) 
with the imbalance data. The mean AUC values in both models from three lung volume definitions 
are less than 0.6. The AUC values exhibited large differences between logistic regression (Fig. 2c) 
and random forest (Fig. 2d) when the resampled balanced dataset was used. Possible reasons for this 
performance difference are described in detail in the subsequent Discussion section. However, no 
statistical variations found in ROC/AUC for the three lung volume definitions, though. 
 
 
Figure 1. Statistical analyses of three dosimetric variables V5, V20, and MLD calculated from three lung 
volume definitions. (a) Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) test; (b) Mann-Whitney U test; (c) Univariate 
logistic regression. 
 
7 
 
 
SHAP values for each ML model under each of three lung volumes are illustrated in Figs. 3 and 4 for 
the results with the imbalanced and the resampled balanced datasets, respectively. In all six subplots 
of Fig. 3, SHAP values are all close to zero, indicating that none of the variables makes significant 
contributions to RP prediction for either ML models. This is consistent with the low AUCs values 
observed in Figs. 2a and 2b. With the artificially balanced dataset, SHAP values for each of these 
variables show substantial difference as demonstrated in Fig. 4. Their impact on the logistic 
regression model output is weaker than that of random forest, which is again consistent with the AUC 
values in Figs. 2c and 2d.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Areas under the curves (AUCs) of the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) from the 10-fold 
cross validation from two machine learning models: logistic regression and random forest using the original 
imbalanced dataset ((a) and (b)) and the resampled balanced dataset ((c) and (d)). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. SHAP values for each of the dosimetric variables that influences the RP prediction when using 
logistic regression (top row) and random forest (bottom row) based on the original imbalanced dataset. 
 
8 
 
4 
Discussion 
Evaluating how different lung volumes impact RP predictive modeling is crucial for determining 
whether varying volume choices affect the predictive power of dosimetric variables on RP risk. This 
research aims to address this clinical question. Unlike previous studies [4-6], our investigation 
utilized a dataset that is four times the size of the previous ones and employed approaches that are 
more comprehensive. Our statistical analysis produced results consistent with earlier findings. 
However, both ML models derived from the RTOG 0617 trial data revealed no significant variations 
in RP risk predictions among different lung volume choices when using V20, V5, and MLD. 
Specifically, the Mann-Whitney U test and univariate logistic regression both showed that V20 and 
MLD are statistically significant in data classification but not V5. This result is partially consistent 
with earlier findings [4, 5] but contradictory to those reported in [13, 14]. The authors in [14] found 
that lung V5 ≥ 40% was associated with RP2 but in [13] they claimed none of these variables could 
be predictive of RP2. However, our study with the original imbalanced data also indicated that none 
of these variables was effective in RP2 prediction by both ML models. The inconsistence from 
different studies could be due to many factors, for instance, treatment planning techniques such as 
3D-CRT or IMRT/VMAT, with or without concurrent chemotherapy, dataset size, analytical 
approach, and son on. It, on the other hand, proves the importance and necessity of a robust study to 
clarify the controversy so that agreement on the dosimetric variable choice and the lung volume 
choice can be reached toward clinical applications. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. SHAP values for each of the dosimetric variables that influences the RP prediction when using 
logistic regression (top row) and random forest (bottom row) based on the resampled balanced dataset. 
9 
AUC values from both supervised ML models trained and validated on the original imbalanced data 
were less than 0.6 (Figs. 2a and 2b), revealing the fact that either the three input variables showed 
little predictive power, or the imbalanced data led to biased models and inaccurate prediction, or both. 
To try alternative dosimetric variables, we calculated 70 volumes (V1, V2, …, V70) from cumulative 
dose volume histograms (DVHs) in 1 Gy increments and then applied principal component analysis 
(PCA) to identify the four most influential principal components, which were used as input variables 
for a logistic regression model. However, this DVH-PCA-LR analysis showed statistically 
insignificant differences among the lung volume choices (refer to Fig. A2a in Appendix). It is 
unsurprising that these new variables yielded similar outcome because both sets of variables are 
DVH-based. Most importantly, they are congregated quantities without spatial information that might 
be crucial for effective RP prediction, as indicated by many studies [15-18].  
To test whether imbalanced dataset caused reduced ML performance, we employed SMOTE to 
oversample the minority group and undersampled the majority group so that a balanced dataset was 
generated. With the balanced dataset, RF outperformed LR as shown in Figs. 2c and 2d. This 
difference could be due to several reasons. Firstly, LR assumes a linear relationship between the 
variables and RP, which may not be true. LR struggles to capture the relationship effectively while 
RF can better handle such complexities. Secondly, although the class imbalance was mitigated, LR 
could still be sensitive to how well the minority group was represented. Particularly, if the 
oversampling leads to overfitting, RF may not perform well. RF, however, with their ensemble 
approach and ability to generalize, are more robust to such overfitting. Thirdly, LR may not capture 
interactions between variables unless explicitly modeled but RF does this naturally through their 
decision trees, which can be beneficial in a balanced dataset where these interactions become more 
prominent. Lastly, LR might have a higher bias compared to RF, which could be more pronounced 
when the dataset is balanced through oversampling. On the other hand, RF has a lower bias and can 
better manage the tradeoff between bias and variance, leading to better performance. Despite the 
performance difference, no visible difference was observed among different lung volumes. 
The rationale behind using SHAP to explain the output of machine learning models is to determine 
which variable(s) make significant contribution to the RP prediction since there has been no 
consensus among these three quantities. Based on the original imbalanced data, none of these 
dosimetric variables showed significant contribution regardless of LR nor RF model (Fig. 3). With 
the balanced data, however, SHAP values for these variables change drastically (Fig. 4). From both 
LR and RF models, V20 is always the influential feature in all different lung volume cases while 
MLD and V5 vary. However, no clear distinction between LR and RF in terms of SHAP values for 
10 
these variables can be seen. In theory, SHAP provides better visualization such as summary plots and 
dependence plots that help compare how features impact prediction across different models. 
 
5 
Conclusion 
Consistent with most previous studies, V20 and MLD are associated with RP2 from the statistical 
analysis. Different lung volume definitions do not show significant impact on RP risk prediction from 
both statistical analysis and machine learning. Low AUC values suggest limited effectiveness of these 
variables as RP2 predictors for machine learning so further investigation is needed to determine more 
useful predictors. 
 
Acknowledgment 
This manuscript was prepared using data from Datasets from the NCTN/NCORP Data Archive of the 
National Cancer Institute’s (NCI’s) National Clinical Trials Network (NCTN).  Data were originally 
collected from clinical trial NCT number NCT00533949 “A Randomized Phase III Comparison of 
Standard-Dose (60 Gy) Versus High-Dose (74 Gy) Conformal Radiotherapy With Concurrent and 
Consolidation Carboplatin/Paclitaxel +/- Cetuximab (IND #103444) in Patients With Stage IIIA/IIIB 
Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer”. All analyses and conclusions in this manuscript are the sole 
responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the opinions or views of the clinical trial 
investigators, the NCTN, or the NCI.  
This work was partially supported by the research grant from Radiation Oncology Institute (Grant 
#ROI 2022-9132). 
 
11 
Appendix 
Figure A1 shows the distributions of three dosimetric variables V20, V5, and MLD across three 
normal lung volume definition with the Shaprio-Wilk test. The purpose of this sanity check is to 
verify if these variables follow a normal distribution, which is a prerequisite of the subsequent 
statistical analysis. Those with p-values > 0.05 follow the normal distribution otherwise quasi-normal 
distribution or not at all. Top row: (a), (b), (c) are the distributions of three variables in the total lung 
(TL) – GTV volume definition. Middle row: (d), (e), (f) are in the total lung (TL) – CTV volume 
definition. Bottom row: (g), (h), (i) are in the total lung (TL) – PTV volume definition. 
 
Figure A1. Shapiro-Wilk test of the dosimetric variables mean lung dose (MLD), V5 (lung volume 
receiving 5 Gy), V20 (lung volume receiving 20 Gy) in three normal lung volume definitions. Top 
row: total lung – GTV (gross tumor volume); middle row: total lung – CTV (clinical target volume); 
bottom row: total lung – PTV (planning target volume). 
 
 
12 
 
Figure A2. Receiver operation characteristic curves based on four principal components determined 
by the principal component analysis from the 70 bin dose-volume-histogram data. (a) with the 
original imbalanced data set; (b) with the resampled balanced dataset.  
 
 
13 
References 
1. 
Graham, M.V., et al., Clinical dose-volume histogram analysis for pneumonitis after 3D 
treatment for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys, 1999. 
45(2): p. 323-9. 
2. 
Bradley, J.D., et al., Standard-dose versus high-dose conformal radiotherapy with 
concurrent and consolidation carboplatin plus paclitaxel with or without cetuximab for 
patients with stage IIIA or IIIB non-small-cell lung cancer (RTOG 0617): a randomised, 
two-by-two factorial phase 3 study. Lancet Oncol, 2015. 16(2): p. 187-99. 
3. 
Nestle, U., et al., ESTRO ACROP guidelines for target volume definition in the treatment of 
locally advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Radiother Oncol, 2018. 127(1): p. 1-5. 
4. 
Wang, W., et al., Effect of normal lung definition on lung dosimetry and lung toxicity 
prediction in radiation therapy treatment planning. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys, 2013. 
86(5): p. 956-63. 
5. 
Meng, Y., et al., Excluding PTV from lung volume may better predict radiation pneumonitis 
for intensity modulated radiation therapy in lung cancer patients. Radiat Oncol, 2019. 
14(1): p. 7. 
6. 
Chen, Z., et al., Three definitions of normal lung volumes for predicting radiation 
pneumonitis in advanced NSCLC treated with radical chemoradiation therapy, in 2020 
World Conference on Lung Cancer, A.A. Adjei, Editor. 2021, Elsevier: Virtual Meeting. p. 
S261. 
7. 
Movsas, B., et al., Quality of Life Analysis of a Radiation Dose-Escalation Study of Patients 
With Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: A Secondary Analysis of the Radiation Therapy 
Oncology Group 0617 Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Oncol, 2016. 2(3): p. 359-67. 
8. 
Clark, K., et al., The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA): Maintaining and Operating a Public 
Information Repository. Journal of Digital Imaging, 2013. 26(6): p. 1045-1057. 
9. 
Deasy, J.O., A.I. Blanco, and V.H. Clark, CERR: a computational environment for 
radiotherapy research. Med Phys, 2003. 30(5): p. 979-85. 
10. 
Radzi, S.F.M., et al., Hyperparameter Tuning and Pipeline Optimization via Grid Search 
Method and Tree-Based AutoML in Breast Cancer Prediction. J Pers Med, 2021. 11(10). 
11. 
Chawla, N.V., et al., SMOTE: Sythetic Minority Over-sampling Technique. Journal of 
Artificial Intelligence Research, 2002. 16: p. 321-357. 
12. 
Lundberg, S.M., et al., Explainable machine-learning predictions for the prevention of 
hypoxaemia during surgery. Nat Biomed Eng, 2018. 2(10): p. 749-760. 
13. 
Yamashita, H., et al., Exceptionally high incidence of symptomatic grade 2-5 radiation 
pneumonitis after stereotactic radiation therapy for lung tumors. Radiat Oncol, 2007. 2: p. 
21. 
14. 
Tatsuno, S., et al., Risk factors for radiation pneumonitis after rotating gantry intensity-
modulated radiation therapy for lung cancer. Sci Rep, 2022. 12(1): p. 590. 
15. 
Chao, M., et al., Three-dimensional cluster formation and structure in heterogeneous dose 
distribution of intensity modulated radiation therapy. Radiother Oncol, 2018. 127(2): p. 
197-205. 
16. 
Chao, M., et al., Dose cluster model parameterization of the parotid gland in irradiation of 
head and neck cancer. Australas Phys Eng Sci Med, 2019. 
17. 
Ebert, M.A., et al., Spatial descriptions of radiotherapy dose: normal tissue complication 
models and statistical associations. Phys Med Biol, 2021. 66(12). 
18. 
Chao, M., et al., Cluster model incorporating heterogeneous dose distribution of partial 
parotid irradiation for radiotherapy induced xerostomia prediction with machine learning 
methods. Acta Oncol, 2022. 61(7): p. 842-848. 
 
