 
Critically assessing atavism, an evolution-centered and 
deterministic hypothesis on cancer 
 
 
Bertrand Daignan-Fornier1 and Thomas Pradeu2,3 
 
1 Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, IBGC, UMR 5095, Bordeaux, France 
2 Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, ImmunoConcEpT, UMR5164, Bordeaux, France  
3 Presidential Fellow, Chapman University, Orange, CA, USA 
 
 
Bertrand Daignan-Fornier:   
b.daignan-fornier@ibgc.cnrs.fr 
Thomas Pradeu:  
 
 
thomas.pradeu@u-bordeaux.fr 
 
ORCID 
BDF : 0000-0003-2352-9700 
TP : 0000-0002-6590-3281 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Cancer is most commonly viewed as resulting from somatic mutations enhancing proliferation 
and invasion. Some hypotheses further propose that these new capacities reveal a breakdown 
of multicellularity allowing cancer cells to escape proliferation and cooperation control 
mechanisms that were implemented during evolution of multicellularity. Here we critically 
review one such hypothesis, named ‘atavism’, which puts forward the idea that cancer results 
from the re-expression of normally repressed genes forming a program, or toolbox, inherited 
from unicellular or simple multicellular ancestors. This hypothesis places cancer in an 
interesting evolutionary perspective that has not been widely explored and deserves attention. 
Thinking about cancer within an evolutionary framework, especially the major transitions to 
multicellularity, offers particularly promising perspectives. It is therefore of the utmost important 
to analyze why one approach that tries to achieve this aim, the atavism hypothesis, has not so 
far emerged as a major theory on cancer. We outline the features of the atavism hypothesis 
that , would benefit from clarification and, if possible, unification. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
Because it lies among the most frequent causes of human death, cancer, as a disease, has 
received a lot of attention. It is quite surprising that, despite several millions of scientific articles 
published on cancer, there is not a consensual conceptual and theoretical framework in cancer 
biology. Even a universally accepted definition of cancer is lacking [1]. This is largely because 
cancer is a highly heterogeneous disease and cancers are often presented as a “family of 
diseases”, despite the fact that most cancers share a set of common manifestations often 
summarized as uncontrolled proliferation, invasion, and metastases. 
 
There is a strong need for well-articulated theoretical frameworks on cancer that would reveal 
some common underlying principles of cancer development and would make it possible to 
formulate novel testable predictions [2]. In the present paper, we explore one approach that 
presents itself as such a well-articulated, encompassing, and predictive theoretical framework, 
namely the ‘atavistic theory’. But, before we explore this theory in detail, let us start with a short 
description of the current landscape of theoretical approaches to cancer.  
 
There are many obstacles to building a general theory of cancer. One crucial obstacle is that, 
because of cancer heterogeneity, one counter-example is often not considered sufficient to 
falsify the hypothesis; therefore, the general plausibility of the hypothesis can be privileged 
over its refutability. There is an additional level of heterogeneity when considering hypotheses 
on cancer: some hypotheses deal with the distal and/or proximal causes of cancer (e.g. 
‘somatic mutation theory’) while others concentrate on the modalities of its progression (e.g. 
‘tumors as organs’ [3]). Some theories are centered on internal causes while others privilege 
external ones (e.g. ‘viral origin’ of cancer). Ideally, all hypotheses should account for the fact 
that cancer can result from external causes, such as infectious agents or mutagens, as well as 
endogenous causes, such as hormonal imbalance or tissue alteration and that less direct 
complex factors, such as diet or aging, further complicate the picture. Finally, when intending 
to compare cancer hypotheses, an additional layer of difficulty comes from the fact that, for 
each hypothesis, cell, tissue, or organ is proposed to be the major level of dysfunction, making 
it difficult to compare the different hypotheses in a single experimental model. Thus, several 
hypotheses explaining cancer have emerged over time and coexist in the literature, while their 
plausibility and soundness rely on very heterogeneous bases. 
 
Probably the most influential theory on cancer is the somatic mutation theory (SMT). 
Historically, several viral infectious agents were identified as capable of generating cancer, 
initially suggesting that cancer could be the outcome of various infectious diseases, although 
in many cases no such agent could be identified. However, the later identification of 
Helicobacter pylori as an agent of stomach cancer has further substantiated the idea that we 
may still underestimate the frequency of cancers involving a viral or bacterial pathogen as a 
key causal agent. The current estimation of such infection-triggered cancers is in the 15-20% 
range [4]. Because many cancers are not thought to be associated with infectious agents, more 
proximal causes shared by all cancers were searched that would include infection-caused 
cancers but also cancers caused by radiations or hereditary predispositions, for example. This 
resulted in the SMT, which is today the prevalent hypothesis in cancer research. This theory 
says that cancer is a disease of genetic origin that initially affects a single cell and provides it 
with the capacity to proliferate under conditions where and when it should not. It stipulates that 
mutations in specific genes allow selection of hyper-proliferative cells that end-up invading 
adjacent tissues and propagating in the body in the form of metastases. A major strength of 
SMT is the fact that mutations, often (if not always), contribute to cancer and that several of 
these mutations have been clearly identified. The uncertainties and discussions concern more 
their precise causal role(s) in the process and how it is sequentially organized. How many 
mutations are necessary? How are they selected? In this theory, cancer is mostly genetic and 
accidental, although there are additional favoring circumstances that can be physiological or 
environmental. Importantly, onco-viruses and cancer-inducing somatic mutations often affect 
the same human proteins and contributed to identify key-player genes in the first place. 
 
Despite the dominant position of SMT among cancer hypotheses, several intriguing 
observations that cannot be simply explained by SMT were reported [5], suggesting that 
mutations alone may not be sufficient to explain the whole picture of cancer development. For 
example, many chemical agents that are carcinogens are not mutagens and some of them, 
such as asbestos fibers, are thought to alter the tissues rather than the cells. This led to the 
emergence of an alternative theory, named tissue organization field theory (TOFT), stipulating 
that loss of tissue organization, and not genetic mutations, is at the origin cancer [5]. Basically, 
the idea is that “…the control of cell division vanishes when the surrounded tissues lose their 
structure” [6]. The TOFT extends a long tradition of ‘field’, tissue-level, explanations of cancer 
[7,8]. Whether SMT and TOFT are really incompatible or should be conciliated into a common 
hypothesis has been debated [6,9]. 
 
In addition to SMT and TOFT, there are hypotheses privileging the idea that cancer properties 
are not newly acquired, but instead reemerge from the past. In these hypotheses, cancer 
properties resurface from ontogeny (‘embryonic origin’) or from phylogeny (‘atavism’). In these 
two cases, the mere arguments in favor of these theories are observed coincidence (e.g., gene 
expression) and theoretical plausibility, based on the idea that it is more likely that cancer 
develops using pre-existing properties, rather than creating new ones’ ex nihilo. Basically, the 
embryonic and atavism hypotheses present cancer as the reactivation of functionalities that 
are repressed in the adult stage such as, for example, metabolic enzymes that are usually only 
expressed in the embryo and which expression is turned-off in the adult. Here we offer a 
systematic examination of the atavistic hypothesis, its roots, main claims, and arguments. We 
also discuss its connections to SMT and to the prevalent claim that cancer constitutes a 
breakdown of multicellularity [10]. We conclude by situating atavism into the broader context of 
theoretical oncology, especially as compared to other frameworks connecting evolutionary 
biology and cancer biology. 
 
THE ATAVISTIC HYPOTHESIS, AN EVOLUTION-CENTERED AND STRONGLY 
DETERMINISTIC VIEW OF CANCER  
 
The atavistic hypothesis roots are ancient (see BOX 1), it clearly anchors cancer in long-term 
evolution (i.e., species evolution over billions of years), a viewpoint which is different from the 
‘within-organism evolution’ view of SMT (see[11,12] for recent discussion). Specifically, the 
atavistic hypothesis opposes properties of unicellular ancestors, presumably reactivated 
during cancer, to those of complex multicellular organisms dealing with cancer. In this view, 
cancer cells would face stressful conditions reminiscent of those faced by ancestral unicellular 
cells in their environment [13–15]. These adverse conditions could tentatively be coped-with by 
reactivation of ancient functions, which would have remained repressed during evolution of 
multicellularity. Hence the atavistic hypothesis is centered on the idea of an incomplete 
transition to multicellularity [16], in which multicellular organisms would have conserved 
‘reactivatable’ traces of their history, in the form of mechanisms previously selected to deal 
with it [15]. 
 
Demarcation from other hypotheses 
 
Israel clearly places his hypothesis at a certain distance from the ‘mutation-first’ hypothesis: 
 
The formidable survival efficiency conferred in every case by the genetic and 
phenotypic changes that accumulate in cancer cells during their malignant 
progression may be viewed as the result of combined and integrated genetic 
responses induced by damaging or threatening environmental events which are in 
themselves not necessarily mutagenic. [13] 
 
This idea was reaffirmed later by Davies and Agus, two other proponents of atavism: 
 
The fact that cancer progresses in such an organized, systematic and predictable 
manner contradicts the notion of rogue defective cells running amok, and suggests 
instead a deeply-embedded pre-programmed repertoire of activity—a sort of ‘cancer 
subroutine’— possibly triggered by mutations but not primarily driven by them. [17] 
 
These points are central to the atavistic hypothesis, the plausibility of which rests on the idea 
that the reactivation of an ancient (and normally repressed) program is much simpler and 
hence more likely than the expectation of multiple independent random mutations. This cost-
effective point of view (less steps being more likely, by analogy to the use of parsimony in 
phylogeny) has been largely expressed by Mark Vincent [18]. The argument is that it would be 
much simpler (and hence more likely) to activate cancer properties collectively rather than 
individually through a process requiring multiple events (random coincidence) [18]. 
 
Cancer cells exhibit a characteristic suite of peculiar traits including ceaseless 
proliferation, genomic instability, immortality, insult resilience, paradoxical aerobic 
glycolysis, and host destruction. There is no a priori reason why these traits should 
consistently co-aggregate. [18] 
 
This is in direct opposition to the idea that cancer is the result of convergent within-organism 
evolution according to which similar conditions result in the selection of similar phenotypes. 
 
The parsimonious explanation is not convergent evolution, but the release of an highly 
conserved survival program, honed by the exigencies of the Pre-Cambrian, to which 
the cancer cell seems better adapted; and which is recreated within, and at great cost 
to, its host. [18] 
 
… the fact that all cancer cells, in all people, at all times, come to exhibit this nearly 
identical set of core traits has to be seen as a fantastically coincident type of convergent 
evolution, although this is not often acknowledged. [19] 
 
In brief, parsimony is an important piece of argument in the atavistic hypothesis, and it operates 
at two different levels: first, in the atavistic hypothesis, there is no need to re-create pre-existing 
properties, they just need to be reactivated. Second, it seems much simpler to reactivate them 
collectively, via a common program, rather than individually and sequentially via random 
mutations. Of note, while parsimony is often used in phylogeny to compare the likelihood of 
evolution trajectories by comparing the number of successive steps needed in each path, it 
remains a probabilistic tool and in no case is a decisive instrument. 
 
Cancer as the result of the re-expression of a repressed program present in every somatic cell 
The pillar of the current forms of the atavistic hypothesis is the presumed existence of a 
repressed program (also referred to as an ancient toolkit) that is normally not expressed in 
human adult somatic cells. This strongly programmatic view of cancer differs significantly from 
the prevalent views that see cancer as a strongly accidental dysfunction, at either the cell 
(SMT) or tissue level (TOFT). 
 
… cancer is an atavistic condition that occurs when genetic or epigenetic malfunction 
unlocks an ancient “toolkit” of preexisting adaptations, re-establishing the dominance 
of an earlier layer of genes that controlled loose-knit colonies of only partially 
differentiated cells, similar to tumors. [20] 
 
“Cancer viewed as a programmed, evolutionarily conserved life-form, rather than just a 
random series of disease-causing mutations, answers the rarely asked question of 
what the cancer cell is for, provides meaning for its otherwise mysterious suite of 
attributes, and encourages a different type of thinking about treatment.” [18] 
The key ‘reason’ alleged for such a program is that it would allow survival of the cell [13] or, as 
put by Vincent [18], cancer could be considered as a ’lifeboat’. The view of cancer as a survival 
program, rather than a local dysfunction, emphasizes the apparent increased ‘independency’ 
of cancer cells toward the organism and are reminiscent of hypotheses favoring endogenous 
causes such as endo-parasitism or more generally the view of cancer cells as selfish or 
cheating actors [21,22]. Many properties associated with cancer are presumably part of the 
‘survival at any cost’ program, including the Warburg effect, genome instability, ceaseless 
proliferation (telomerase de-repression), immortality (apoptosis evasion) and insult resilience 
[18]. A comprehensive list of properties associated with cancer that could be of atavistic origin 
can be found in Table 16-2 of a book chapter by Vincent[23]. It is noteworthy that, by contrast 
to the SMT which is largely centered on cell proliferation, the atavistic hypothesis is focused 
on cell survival. 
The mechanisms presumably triggering the reactivation of the ‘repressed program’ are not 
precisely defined. The authors generally do not exclude that mutations could play a role in this 
process, but other types of events are also envisioned.   
However, even if mutations are, in a majority of cases, the first transforming events, it 
does not follow that all the ensuing genetic events are random or that they necessarily 
consist of mutations. [13] 
 
… damaging events, or events which are a threat to cell survival and function, may, 
whether mutagenic or not, induce a cascade of genetic responses which overcome the 
consequences of the initial damage and render the cell capable of dealing with several 
kinds of unrelated threats. [13] 
 
A useful analogy is a genie in a bottle, with the genie playing the role of the cancer 
program and the confining bottle representing the body’s, as yet poorly understood, 
regulatory apparatus (including tumor suppression strategies). The bottle may be 
shattered in many ways (mutations caused by radiation damage, hypoxia, carcinogens, 
inflammation, stromal environmental changes, etc.) but, once released, the genie 
executes its agenda deterministically by accessing ancient, highly conserved, deeply 
entrenched and well-protected genetic pathways that control basic multicellular function 
like development, tissue regeneration and immune response. [17]  
 
Whatever the precise content of the program and how its execution is triggered, it is important 
to understand where this program stands and how it interferes with life in the absence of 
cancer. Basically, the program is based on specific gene expression and these genes are 
located in the genome. As put by Thomas and coworkers [24], the ‘conserved survival program 
[is] encrypted in every eukaryotic cell’. Genes contributing to the program are presumably in a 
latent form, suggesting that they are somehow turned-off. Of note, in one of the original 
formulations of the hypothesis, it is not ruled out that some of these genes could normally be 
active under specific conditions while others may have fallen into disuse.  
 
Atavisms occur because genes for previously existing traits are often preserved in a 
genome but are switched off, or relegated to non-coding (“junk”) segments of DNA. 
… 
Some of these pathways are still in active use in healthy organisms today, for example, 
during embryogenesis and woundhealing. Others have fallen into disuse, but remain, 
latent in the genome, awaiting reactivation. [20] 
The atavistic hypothesis is hence a gene-centered hypothesis, just as SMT, but, by contrast 
to SMT, atavism is not mutation-centered, nor selection-centered. Because the repressed 
program is deterministic, there is no need for selection to provoke tumorigenesis, it is all 
encrypted in the program itself. While there are several reasons why the atavistic hypothesis 
is appealing (see BOX 2), in the next two sections, we will list a series of evolution-related 
problems, as well as internal contradictions and divergences that appear to us as serious 
concerns regarding the atavistic hypothesis.  
 
EVOLUTION-RELATED PROBLEMS WITH THE ATAVISTIC HYPOTHESIS  
 
The framework underlying the atavism hypotheses is that evolution in general, and that of 
multicellularity in particular, proceeded by addition of layers of complexity that can take the 
form of new genes which are added to pre-existing genes and generate new capabilities. 
In evading one layer of genetic regulation – turning proto-oncogenes into oncogenes – 
cancer mutations uncover a deeper, older layer of genes that code for behaviors that 
are often able to outsmart our best efforts to fight them. 
It took more than a billion years to evolve the eukaryotic genes present in Metazoa 1.0 
and a further ~billion years to evolve the sophisticated genetic and epigenetic overlay 
that led to Metazoa 2.0. 
The genetic apparatus of the new Metazoa 2.0 was overlain on the old genetic 
apparatus of Metazoa 1.0. [20] (our emphasis) 
While this scenario of an increasing genetic complexity through evolution was once thought to 
be the most likely (Jacques Monod, for instance, in Chance and necessity [25], predicted one 
million proteins encoded by the human genome), whole genome sequencing has changed our 
view on genome complexity. Mechanisms of co-option as well as complex genetic interactions 
such as pleiotropy and epistasis, rather than simple addition of more genes, have emerged as 
a likely explanation for the low number of genes in complex organisms such as humans. 
Concerning multicellularity more specifically, several phylogenetic studies based on whole 
genome sequencing [26] rather argue for multicellularity developing (often by co-option) on a 
preset of protein domains already present in the unicellular ancestors and not by adding layers 
of complexity in the form of new ‘multicellularity’ genes. This was actually experimentally 
established, in the case of volvocines (green algae). Indeed, it was shown that expression of 
the Rb form of Gonium pectorale (a simple multicellular algae) in place of the endogenous form 
of Rb in its unicellular relative Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, was sufficient to make it colonial 
(simple multicellularity) [27]. 
 
Another major concern with the atavistic hypothesis is that the idea that ‘disused genes’ would 
be conserved in an intact functional form in the genome, waiting to be reactivated, is unlikely. 
Experimental evolution on myxobacteria allowed to establish that disused genes can be rapidly 
eliminated [28,29]. This was also illustrated by studies on the Astyanax cave fish eye [30]. These 
results suggested that, in absence of selective pressure or when there is a weak counter-
selective pressure, disused traits can be repeatedly lost during evolution. Beside allowing 
survival of cancer cells, which does not seem to provide a clear evolutionary advantage, is 
there any selective pressure on the survival program to favor its maintenance for one billion 
years? This question is not directly addressed in the atavistic hypothesis while it severely 
affects its plausibility. Even weirder, these genes were proposed to be ‘relegated to non-coding 
(“junk”) segments of DNA’, as written by Davies and Lineweaver [20], a proposal seemingly 
suggesting that they might not be functional anymore. Where these genes lie in the genome 
and how they are maintained functional and silent over eons is critical for the hypothesis and 
not yet convincingly addressed neither conceptually nor experimentally. An alternative 
explanation could be that these genes are not disused. They could be only occasionally used 
(for example during embryonic development) but generally not used in the adult organism. 
Then, if these are genes required for the life cycle, what is ‘atavistic here? Is it a gene network? 
A program? What does it mean at the molecular level? The repressed-gene hypothesis 
appears in contradiction with what we know on long-term evolution and gene conservation, 
while the repressed-program notion is so vague that the atavistic hypothesis loses its 
plausibility and testability. In brief, cell survival at any cost supposes the maintenance during 
billion-years of a program that is never successful, since cancer cell survival is ephemeral and 
does not give any obvious long-term advantage to the organism, which is precisely the entity 
selected in the million-year time scale separating the extant organism from its unicellular 
ancestor. Why should such an every-time-losing program be maintained during evolution? The 
program does not operate at the level at which natural selection operates, it should hence 
disappear rapidly, due to the lack of long-term selection, instead of being maintained in a 
repressed form as proposed in the atavistic hypothesis. 
 
Of note, in the atavistic hypothesis proposed by Vincent [18], cancer cells have purposes and 
goals, giving the hypothesis a hint of finalism.  
 
These organizing principles service a single higher goal: ‘‘any-cost cellular survivalism’’ 
 
Hence a broad spectrum, rapid response defense mechanism could have evolved, in 
which stochastic genomic reshuffling featured prominently, providing a goal to which 
everything else might be sacrificed. 
 
Escape and re-invention: The purpose of cancer 
 
The cancer cell’s strange portfolio, including both aerobic glycolysis and some degree 
of (modulated) oxidative phosphorylation, along with hypermutation, aneuploidy, 
apoptotic disablement, immortality, ROS generation, DNA disrepair, asexual 
reproduction, differentiation block, and hyperproliferation, resurrects an ancient modus 
vivendi, solely purposed for opportunistic survival. 
 
If the cancer cell is a heuristic machine whose sole purpose is to invent its way to a 
future, then therapeutic refractoriness becomes more comprehensible 
 
Disturbingly, cancer exists as an encrypted potentiality, a proto-organism, in every 
eukaryotic cell, in every multicellular animal, including ourselves: life’s ‘‘Plan B’’, and 
purposed rather than accidental.[18] (our emphasis) 
 
It is not clear to us whether this insistence on goals and purposes is merely a stylistic ease or 
a deliberate stance and whether the author appreciated how problematic this can be in a 
Darwinian perspective. At any rate, it somehow masks the implausibility of the hypothesis from 
a natural selection perspective. Importantly, this critique applies only to some, not all, 
proponents of atavism. 
 
INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS AND DIVERGENCES, AMONG AUTHORS AND ALONG 
THE YEARS 
 
Because the atavism hypotheses were initially formulated in three distinct articles[13,18,20] and 
further diversified in subsequent work, they form a family of hypotheses with contradictions 
and divergences, that we think should be clarified by the proponents of the hypotheses. 
Examples of such divergences are discussed here. 
 
The ancestor 
 
In the various versions of the atavistic hypothesis, the ancestor, presumably at the origin of the 
repressed program that is reactivated upon cancer, is ill defined. Sometimes, the cancer 
survival program is compared to the well-known bacterial SOS response [13], which apparently 
has no strict equivalent in eukaryotes. In later articles, the evolutionary origin of the repressed 
program is much closer to human; for example, a proto-metazoan [20] or a protozoan-like / type 
of unicellular holozoan opisthokont [18], sometimes it is possibly a ciliate [31], as in the tentative 
explanation for a past foundation for genome instability (a highly frequent manifestation in 
cancer that is rather difficult to explain in an evolutionary perspective). The ‘resuscitated 
ancestor’ hence appears as a moving target, making any precise molecular prediction difficult. 
This malleability is obviously required for the ad hoc plausibility of each sub-hypothesis, but 
because the ancestral repressed program is at the very center of the atavistic hypothesis, the 
tension between the sub-hypotheses should be frontally discussed to clarify the conceptual 
framework. In the present forms of the hypothesis, it is not clear whether all the supporters of 
atavism have a common view on where in evolution the repressed program really comes from. 
 
Survival and proliferation 
 
Cancer is often defined as ‘uncontrolled cell proliferation’ and most hypotheses on cancer are 
centered on cell proliferation and how it is made possible, either by genetic means (SMT) or 
when surrounding tissues lose their structure (TOFT). By contrast, the atavistic hypothesis is 
centered on ‘survival’. Indeed, the term ‘survival’ figures in the title of two founding papers [13,18] 
and is much more frequent in the texts (18 occurrences for surviv* in Israel 1996 [13]; 37 in 
Vincent 2012 [18]; 11 in Davies and Lineweaver 2011 [20]) than ‘proliferation’ (7 occurrences for 
prolif* in Israel 1996 [13]; 7 in Vincent 2012 [18]; 7 in Davies and Lineweaver 2011 [20]). This 
specificity of the atavistic hypothesis is a very important point, but the hypothesis lacks a clearly 
enunciated articulation with physiological and pathological cell proliferation. How does ‘survival 
at any cost’ connect to hyper-proliferation? This is at odds with a possible unicellular origin of 
the ‘repressed program’ since in stressful environments, unicellular organisms most of the time 
suppress reproduction/proliferation to ensure long-term survival [10]. Does it mostly act by 
permitting proliferation once the cancer cell has been rescued from death by the ‘repressed 
program’? Should survival here be understood as survival of the cell lineage rather than 
survival of the individual cells? This could make more sense but is not clearly stated by the 
authors.  
 
The ‘repressed program’ is presumed to sit in every cell genome and its reactivation 
provides the cell with its cancer properties. However, nematodes that show no somatic 
proliferation at the adult stage (absence of somatic stem cells) show no cancer, suggesting 
that the repressed program never activates in nematodes or that its activation is not sufficient 
in the absence of somatic cell proliferation. If survival comes first and then allows proliferation 
(based on ancient unicellular properties), then the nematode should have cancer – except if it 
had lost the repressed program (together with, but independently from, somatic proliferation), 
which would be a very unlikely coincidence. The plausibility of the current atavistic hypothesis 
as an auto-sufficient cause of cancer is severely challenged by this apparent dependency on 
prior proliferation. 
 
The SMT attraction 
 
In its initial forms, the atavistic hypothesis differed significantly from the SMT in two important 
ways. First, in the SMT, cancer is understood as a multistep disease, while the ‘repressed 
program’ proposed by atavism makes it understandable using a single step (reactivation). 
Second, Darwinian selection, in the SMT, is critical for the succession of steps to occur and 
eventually result in cancer by a convergent evolution type of mechanism. By contrast, in the 
atavistic hypothesis, once the program is launched, there is no need for Darwinian selection 
to express all the properties of cancer cells, since cancer properties in the atavistic hypothesis 
are just passive outcomes of the repressed program. Although both atavism and SMT are 
gene-centered hypotheses, they are very different and largely incompatible. 
 
The existence of such a toolkit implies that the progress of the neoplasm in the host 
organism differs distinctively from normal Darwinian evolution. [20] 
 
These two major differences have been largely wiped out in two recent publications, drifting 
the atavistic hypothesis continuously closer to the SMT. First, the unique-program initial idea 
is challenged by the fact that traits such as genome instability or the Warburg effect are clearly 
frequent but not universal in cancer. This is at odds with a deterministic program leading to a 
unique outcome that was initially proposed in the genie-in-a-bottle metaphor: “…once 
released, the genie executes its agenda deterministically...” [17]. In a more recent publication 
entitled “Cancer progression as a sequence of atavistic reversions” [32], the authors abandon 
the idea of the unique-program (the word ‘program’ does not even appear anymore in the 
paper) and shift toward a series of sequential reversions that phenotypically resemble 
ancestral behaviors and are thus called ‘atavistic’ but are not said anymore to proceed from 
the reactivation of a preexisting program. The hypothesis here shifts from global resuscitation 
of an ancestral logic to sequential reversion of some multicellular traits and simultaneously the 
notion of ‘program’ gives way to the notion of ‘modalities’. Finally, the notion of disuse is 
abandoned, and nothing seems ‘repressed’ anymore. As expected in such an attraction toward 
SMT, proliferation is much more used than survival in the 2021 paper (15 times vs 4 times). 
 
Here, we propose that cancer onset and progression involve more than a one-off 
multicellular-to-unicellular reversion, and are better described as a series of 
reversionary transitions. 
 
We argue that cancer is not a single atavism, but a series of atavisms. 
 
Significantly, cancer does not evolve the hallmark properties ab initio; rather, neoplastic 
phenotypes are preexisting modalities latent in the genome, retained because they play 
critical roles in key processes such as embryogenesis, tissue maintenance and wound 
healing. [32] 
 
This renewed hypothesis has its own consistency, but it totally loses two major aspects of the 
initial hypothesis, namely the plausibility associated with parsimony (claiming that one step is 
sufficient to explain all the cancer properties, a situation that would be difficult to explain based 
on random appearance) and the deterministic aspect associated with the programmatic 
viewpoint.  
 
Unlike familiar morphological atavisms, such as supernumerary nipples which involve 
a one-off ontogenic transition cancer is a multistage process in the direction of 
increasing malignancy. [32] 
 
Then how come that a whole set of properties recurrently co-appear in cancer? The random 
coincidence objection made toward SMT [18] clearly backfires this new hypothesis and, 
accordingly, in a parallel work, the possibility of some convergent evolution was reconsidered 
by Vincent and coworkers [24] in an article entitled “Cancer adaptations: Atavism, de novo 
selection, or something in between?”. These two more recent publications [24,32] strongly 
weaken the initial claims and tend to reposition the atavistic hypothesis very close to the SMT, 
which strongly contrasts with atavism’s initial intentions. What important differences might 
remain? Based on the work published by Lineweaver and Davies[31], a main difference between 
SMT and the atavistic hypothesis is the time scale of evolution considered to account for 
cancer occurrence. It counts in years for “within-organism evolution" (SMT) and billions of 
years in the atavism hypothesis. The second major difference reside in the role played by 
selection and arises from the first difference mentioned above. Within organism selection 
potentially operates by all possible means (mutations, overexpression, chimeras…) affecting 
possibly both preexisting or new traits to increase fitness, while in the atavism hypothesis, only 
loss-of-new-functions and gain-of-old-functions are altered. Whether these differences can be 
reconciled or not will probably be a matter for future debates. 
One specificity of the atavistic hypothesis is that it is highly deterministic. The initial trigger 
signal might result from an ‘accident’ but the following steps are highly predictable because 
they are presumed ‘prewritten’. When formulating hypotheses about cancer, there is a constant 
tension between chaos and predictability. The chaotic part of cancer is largely due to genome 
instability, which is found at high frequency in tumors. On the other hand, some sequential 
recurrence is observed in the tumorigenesis process as well as some level of organization in 
the tumor outcome (e.g., tumor as an organ). Such regularities are not understood as produced 
by chaos. Hence, hypotheses on cancer have to combine chaos and predictability. The 
atavistic hypothesis is highly deterministic with its constant appeal to a ‘program’, and de facto 
there are multiple computer analogies in Davies and Lineweaver’s work [20]. The notion of 
program is thought here as a ‘pre-written’ sequence (cascade) of events with a pre-known 
‘long-term’ outcome (suggesting a purpose). The view of life as the execution of pre-written 
programs (metabolic, cell cycle, cell death, development…), has been widely questioned by 
biologists and philosophers alike (e.g. [33,34]). It is notable that in the more recent articles about 
the atavistic hypothesis the notion of program is disappearing – it is not even mentioned in the 
2021 paper by Lineweaver colleagues [32]. This leaves us with serious doubts on what subsists 
of the initial hypothesis formulated by the same authors in 2011 [20]. Indeed, at the end, what 
is left of the idea of a unique program taking place independently of selection? In 2024, what 
is left of the atavistic hypothesis beside the vague idea that cancer could somehow be a 
breakdown of multicellularity? 
 
CONCLUSION  
 
Despite the difficulties of atavism, this approach may prove to have been useful, in retrospect, 
from at least two perspectives. First, it constitutes one of the few attempts to build an 
overarching theory of cancer, in a field where broad-ranging theories have been scarce. 
Second, it has participated in the emergence of more specific conceptual and theoretical 
discussions connecting cancer biology with other fields, especially evolutionary biology and 
research on multicellularity. Indeed, there is a growing and interesting literature on cancer and 
multicellularity [10,22], some of which alludes to atavism. The present critique of atavism does 
not imply at all a critique of this stimulating literature, in which recent and less extreme 
propositions on how cancer could be connected to loss of multicellularity stand out. For 
instance, in her 2020 paper, Aurora Nedelcu proposes two alternatives [10]. Cancer could 
indirectly alter sophisticated cell cooperation properties that were acquired during evolution of 
multicellularity or more directly impair specific mechanisms controlling these properties. She 
draws many potentially fruitful consequences of these alternatives from an experimental and 
even therapeutic viewpoint. 
 
Should the initial atavism hypothesis be experimentally tested, it would be necessary to identify 
key genes of the ‘repressed program’, then show that their absence abolishes cancer (or at 
least some specific cancer properties) and establish whether these genes are expressed 
during normal life cycle or extinct all the time except during cancer (if such repressed genes 
were specifically reactivated during tumorigenesis, then they should be easy to find in the 
terabytes of cancer transcriptome data publicly available). 
 
Because cancer is ill defined and highly heterogeneous, it has been very difficult to build-up a 
satisfying conceptual framework of cancer development. Exploring the various hypotheses 
available in the literature allows to narrow down the likelihood of specific explanations and 
eliminate the less plausible hypotheses. While the atavistic hypothesis was initially built-up on 
plausibility associated with parsimony, in more recent years it lost this asset and appears more 
and more as an evolution-centered byproduct of SMT. Rethinking cancer in an evolutionary 
perspective is interesting and could be fruitful but, in our opinion, should be done away from 
the poorly founded ‘program’ standpoint that is at the center of the atavistic hypothesis. 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The authors thank Aurora Nedelcu, Jean Clairambault and Samir Okasha for their comments 
on the manuscript. This work was supported by the NewMoon research program of the 
University of Bordeaux. The research of TP is funded by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation 
through grant GBMF9021. 
 
Data availability statement: Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were 
created or analyzed in this study. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. Brown, J. S., Amend, S. R., Austin, R. H., Gatenby, R. A., Hammarlund, E. U., & Pienta, K. J. (2023). 
Updating the definition of cancer. Molecular Cancer Research, MCR-23-0411. 
https://doi.org/10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-23-0411 
2. Pradeu, T., Daignan-Fornier, B., Ewald, A., Germain, P., Okasha, S., Plutynski, A., Benzekry, S., 
Bertolaso, M., Bissell, M., Brown, J. S., Chin-Yee, B., Chin-Yee, I., Clevers, H., Cognet, L., 
Darrason, M., Farge, E., Feunteun, J., Galon, J., Giroux, E., … Laplane, L. (2023). Reuniting 
philosophy and science to advance cancer research. Biological Reviews, 98(5), 1668–1686. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/brv.12971 
3. Egeblad, M., Nakasone, E. S., & Werb, Z. (2010). Tumors as Organs: Complex Tissues that Interface 
with the Entire Organism. Developmental Cell, 18(6), 884–901. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2010.05.012 
4. Moore, P. S., & Chang, Y. (2010). Why do viruses cause cancer? Highlights of the first century of 
human tumour virology. Nature Reviews Cancer, 10(12), Article 12. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrc2961 
5. Soto, A. M., & Sonnenschein, C. (2011). The tissue organization field theory of cancer: A testable 
replacement for the somatic mutation theory. BioEssays, 33(5), 332–340. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.201100025 
6. Bedessem, B., & Ruphy, S. (2015). SMT or TOFT? How the Two Main Theories of Carcinogenesis are 
Made (Artificially) Incompatible. Acta Biotheoretica, 63(3), 257–267. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10441-015-9252-1 
7. Smithers, D. W. (1962). An attack on cytologism. Lancet (London, England), 1(7228), 493–499. 
8. Willis, R. A. (1948). Pathology of Tumours. Butterworths. 
9. Rosenfeld, S. (2013). Are the Somatic Mutation and Tissue Organization Field Theories of 
Carcinogenesis Incompatible? Cancer Informatics, 12, CIN.S13013. 
https://doi.org/10.4137/CIN.S13013 
10. Nedelcu, A. M. (2020). The evolution of multicellularity and cancer: Views and paradigms. 
Biochemical Society Transactions, 48(4), 1505–1518. https://doi.org/10.1042/BST20190992 
11. Khozouz, R. (2021). Atavistic cancer model: A new theory of cancer? BioEssays, 43(12), 2100206. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.202100206 
12. Kasperski, A. (2022). Life Entrapped in a Network of Atavistic Attractors: How to Find a Rescue. 
International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 23(7), 4017. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23074017 
13. Israel, L. (1996). Tumour Progression: Random Mutations or an Integrated Survival Response to 
Cellular Stress Conserved from Unicellular Organisms? Journal of Theoretical Biology, 178(4), 
375–380. https://doi.org/10.1006/jtbi.1996.0033 
14. Greaves, M. (2015). Evolutionary determinants of cancer. Cancer Discovery, 5(8), 806–820. 
https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-15-0439 
15. Russo, M., Sogari, A., & Bardelli, A. (2021). Adaptive Evolution: How Bacteria and Cancer Cells 
Survive Stressful Conditions and Drug Treatment. Cancer Discovery, 11(8), 1886–1895. 
https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-20-1588 
16. Clairambault, J. (2019). An evolutionary perspective on cancer, with applications to anticancer 
drug resistance modelling and perspectives in therapeutic control. Journal of Mathematical 
Study, 1. 
17. Davies, P. C., & Agus, D. B. (2016). Stochasticity and determinism in cancer creation and 
progression. Convergent Science Physical Oncology, 1(2), 026003. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/2057-1739/1/2/026003 
18. Vincent, M. (2012). Cancer: A de-repression of a default survival program common to all cells?: A 
life-history perspective on the nature of cancer. BioEssays, 34(1), 72–82. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.201100049 
19. Vincent, M. D. (2011). Cancer: Beyond Speciation. In Advances in Cancer Research (Vol. 112, pp. 
283–350). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-387688-1.00010-7 
20. Davies, P. C. W., & Lineweaver, C. H. (2011). Cancer tumors as Metazoa 1.0: Tapping genes of 
ancient ancestors. Physical Biology, 8(1), 015001. https://doi.org/10.1088/1478-
3975/8/1/015001 
21. Aktipis, C. A., Boddy, A. M., Jansen, G., Hibner, U., Hochberg, M. E., Maley, C. C., & Wilkinson, G. 
S. (2015). Cancer across the tree of life: Cooperation and cheating in multicellularity. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 370(1673), 20140219. 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2014.0219 
22. Okasha, S. (2021). Cancer and the Levels of Selection. The British Journal for the Philosophy of 
Science, 716178. https://doi.org/10.1086/716178 
23. Vincent, M. (2017). Atavism Theory—An Introductory Discourse. In Ecology and Evolution of 
Cancer (pp. 211–218). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-804310-3.00016-8 
24. Thomas, F., Ujvari, B., Renaud, F., & Vincent, M. (2017). Cancer adaptations: Atavism, de novo 
selection, or something in between? BioEssays, 39(8), 1700039. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.201700039 
25. Monod, J. (1971). Chance and necessity: An essay on the natural philosophy of modern biology 
(First american edition). 
26. King, N., Westbrook, M. J., Young, S. L., Kuo, A., Abedin, M., Chapman, J., Fairclough, S., Hellsten, 
U., Isogai, Y., Letunic, I., Marr, M., Pincus, D., Putnam, N., Rokas, A., Wright, K. J., Zuzow, R., 
Dirks, W., Good, M., Goodstein, D., … Rokhsar, D. (2008). The genome of the choanoflagellate 
Monosiga brevicollis and the origin of metazoans. Nature, 451(7180), 783–788. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06617 
27. Hanschen, E. R., Marriage, T. N., Ferris, P. J., Hamaji, T., Toyoda, A., Fujiyama, A., Neme, R., 
Noguchi, H., Minakuchi, Y., Suzuki, M., Kawai-Toyooka, H., Smith, D. R., Sparks, H., Anderson, 
J., Bakarić, R., Luria, V., Karger, A., Kirschner, M. W., Durand, P. M., … Olson, B. J. S. C. (2016). 
The Gonium pectorale genome demonstrates co-option of cell cycle regulation during the 
evolution of multicellularity. Nature Communications, 7(1), 11370. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11370 
28. Velicer, G. J., Lenski, R. E., & Kroos, L. (2002). Rescue of Social Motility Lost during Evolution of 
Myxococcus xanthus in an Asocial Environment. Journal of Bacteriology, 184(10), 2719–2727. 
https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.184.10.2719-2727.2002 
29. Velicer, G. J., Kroos, L., & Lenski, R. E. (1998). Loss of social behaviors by Myxococcus xanthus 
during evolution in an unstructured habitat. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 95(21), 12376–12380. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.21.12376 
30. Jeffery, W. R. (2009). Regressive Evolution in Astyanax Cavefish. Annual Review of Genetics, 43(1), 
25–47. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genet-102108-134216 
31. Lineweaver, C. H., & Davies, P. C. W. (2020). Comparison of the Atavistic Model of Cancer to 
Somatic Mutation Theory: Phylostratigraphic Analyses Support the Atavistic Model. In B. S. 
Gerstman, The Physics of Cancer (pp. 243–261). WORLD SCIENTIFIC. 
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789811223495_0012 
32. Lineweaver, C. H., Bussey, K. J., Blackburn, A. C., & Davies, P. C. W. (2021). Cancer progression as 
a sequence of atavistic reversions. BioEssays, 43(7), 2000305. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.202000305 
33. Lewontin, R. C. (2000). The triple helix: Gene, organism, and environment. Harvard University 
Press. 
34. Oyama, S. (2000). The ontogeny of information: Developmental systems and evolution (2nd ed., 
rev.enl). Duke University Press. 
35. Snow, H. (1893). A Treatise, practical and theoretic on cancers and the cancer-process. J. & A. 
Churchill. 
36. Vincent, M. D. (2009). THE ANIMAL WITHIN: CARCINOGENESIS AND THE CLONAL EVOLUTION OF 
CANCER CELLS ARE SPECIATION EVENTS SENSU STRICTO: CANCER AS SPECIATION. Evolution, 
64(4), 1173–1183. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1558-5646.2009.00942.x 
37. Trigos, A. S., Pearson, R. B., Papenfuss, A. T., & Goode, D. L. (2017). Altered interactions between 
unicellular and multicellular genes drive hallmarks of transformation in a diverse range of 
solid tumors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(24), 6406–6411. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1617743114 
38. Domazet-Lošo, T., & Tautz, D. (2010). Phylostratigraphic tracking of cancer genes suggests a link 
to the emergence of multicellularity in metazoa. BMC Biology, 8(1), 66. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1741-7007-8-66 
39. Bussey, K. J., & Davies, P. C. W. (2021). Reverting to single-cell biology: The predictions of the 
atavism theory of cancer. Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology, 165, 49–55. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2021.08.002 
40. Lineweaver, C. H., Davies, P. C. W., & Vincent, M. D. (2014). Targeting cancer’s weaknesses (not 
its strengths): Therapeutic strategies suggested by the atavistic model. BioEssays, 36(9), 827–
835. https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.201400070 
 
 
 
