Using Linked Micromaps for Evidence-Based Policy 
Randall Powers1, John Eltinge2, Wendy Martinez2, Darcy Steeg Morris2 
 
Abstract:  
Linked micromaps were originally developed to display geographically indexed statistics in an 
intuitive way by connecting them to a sequence of small maps. The approach integrates several 
visualization design principles, such as small multiples, discrete color indexing, and ordering. 
Linked micromaps allow for other types of data displays that are connected to and conditional on 
geographic areas. Initial applications of micromaps used data from the National Cancer Institute and 
the Environmental Protection Agency. In this paper, we will show how linked micromaps can be 
used to better understand and explore relationships and distributions of statistics linked to US states 
and Washington, DC. We will compare linked micromaps with other popular data displays of 
geographic data, such as bubble maps, choropleth maps, and bar charts. We will illustrate how linked 
micromaps can be used for evidence-based decision-making using data from the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, the Census Bureau, and the Economic Research Service. The presentations, R scripts, and 
the data sets used in this article are available here: https://github.com/wlmcensus/Joint-Statistical-
Meetings-Presentation-2024. The work discussed in this article was presented at the Joint Statistical 
Meetings (JSM) 2024 and the American Association for Public Opinion Research (AAPOR) 2024 
Annual Conference. 
 
Acknowledgements and Disclaimer: The authors thank Rose Byrne, Jeffrey Gonzalez, Evan 
Moffett, and Emily Molfino for their helpful comments. The views expressed in this article are those 
of the authors and do not represent the policies of the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the United 
States Census Bureau. All empirical results included in this article depend only on data previously 
cleared for dissemination and are provided through public-access websites. 
 
Keywords:  small multiples, geography, visualization, spatial data, maps, COVID-19, response 
rates, employment, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Census Bureau, Economic Research Service, 
food assistance programs 
 
1. Introduction  
The goal of this work is to review a visualization approach called linked micromaps and to highlight 
some ways in which that approach can be useful for the exploration of policy-relevant statistical 
information. This paper also discusses some ways in which linked micromaps can be better for 
visualizing, exploring, and understanding spatially indexed data than the ways typically used to 
display such data. The idea for linked micromaps was originally developed by Carr and Pierson 
(1996) in response to dissatisfaction with how choropleth maps were used to understand economic 
data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) while Dan Carr was there as a Research Fellow. He 
 
1 Corresponding author, Bureau of Labor Statistics, powers.randall@bls.gov 
 
2 U.S. Census Bureau 
was charged with developing “new and innovative methods for displaying the data.” (Carr and 
Pierson, 1996) 
Linked micromaps provide visual summaries of statistics, data, and geographic distributions in a 
coherent and intuitive manner. They provide accessible tools for exploring and disseminating 
statistical information–including complex distributional and multivariate patterns–connected with 
geography. In general, linked micromaps consist of several columns, with one column depicting a 
set of small maps and areal or polygonal units that are linked across rows to other columns showing 
statistics of interest. Details on the components of linked micromaps will be covered in a later 
section; see Figure 4 for an example of a linked micromaps graphic.  
While original tools for linked micromaps used Java (Carr and Pickle, 2010), statisticians and data 
scientists can easily create them now using two R packages – micromap and micromapST– 
which are available on CRAN (Payton, et al., 2015; Pickle, et al., 2015). The linked micromap 
visualizations can be saved to a graphics file and imported into documents and presentations.  
This paper uses the micromapST package to describe the components of linked micromaps and 
for the applications in Section 4. The micromapST package was created as an easy-to-use interface 
for creating linked micromaps where the geographies of interest are the 50 states and Washington, 
DC. Such geographic data are typically of interest in US federal statistical agencies. The next section 
of the paper describes some of the common ways used for visualizing spatially indexed statistics 
and their limitations. This is followed by a more detailed description of the components in a linked 
micromap. The paper concludes with applications of linked micromap using public-domain data 
from the following sources: 
• 
The American Community Survey (ACS, https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs) 
• 
The Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW, https://www.bls.gov/cew/) 
• 
The Economic Research Agency Food Atlas (https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-
products/food-access-research-atlas/).  
 
2. Visualizing Spatially Indexed Data  
Before exploring the features and usefulness of linked micromaps, it is helpful to provide some 
context by reviewing other methods of displaying state-level data. Examples of typical methods 
described in this section include bar charts, tables, bubble maps (also called proportional symbol 
maps), and choropleth maps. 
Bar charts are a common way to display state-level statistics, in part because they are easily created 
in Microsoft Excel and most statistical programs. Horizontal bars are typically used where the length 
of each bar represents the statistic of interest (e.g., total number of employees in a state, etc.). Figure 
1 displays a bar chart from Excel showing the ACS Response Rates for 2022. The bars are ordered 
alphabetically by state. Within this specific Excel implementation, the default axes labelling for the 
size of the chart is such that every other bar is labeled, so we lose half of the state names. Because 
of these issues, it is difficult to extract useful information about the statistics as they relate to 
geographies. One could also order the data by the statistic, which provides information on their 
distribution. However, there is still a problem of understanding spatial distributions and their 
connections with the statistics. 
State-level data are often presented in a table and again usually ordered alphabetically by state. As 
with bar charts, this method of data presentation makes it difficult to extract information and insights 
regarding the connection between the statistic and geography. It is up to the viewer to make a mental 
comparison of data throughout the table. 
Choropleth maps are often used to display geographic data connected to an areal unit, such as a state 
or county. In choropleth maps, the color indicates some variable of interest; see Figures 2 and 11 for 
examples. Choropleth maps are very popular for good reasons. They are intuitive for most people 
to understand, and they show spatial distributions of one characteristic of data quite well. However, 
there are some limitations (Carr and Pierson, 1996). These include the following:  
• 
It is sometimes difficult to distinguish values using color, especially when color gradients 
are used. 
• 
Additional information related to the statistics of interest is hard to convey on a static map. 
• 
There is no ordering of the statistics (and hence the geography), except through the legend.  
• 
Choropleth maps are most appropriate for proportions or other normalized data, not raw 
counts. 
• 
As given by their nature, choropleth maps give the less populated but large land mass states 
more prominence, making less populous states visually more distinct or important and tiny 
states like Rhode Island easy to miss. 
An enhancement to choropleth maps is the bubble or proportional symbol map. This approach adds 
bubbles or circles over each region that represents one or two additional values using the size of the 
bubble and the color; see Figure 3 for an example. These also have limitations (Robbins, 2013), 
which include: 
• 
A bubble map can be difficult to understand when comparing two or more statistics per 
areal unit (e.g., color of region, color of bubble, size of bubble). 
• 
The overlapping of bubbles can make it difficult to distinguish them. 
• 
It can be hard (impossible?) to ascertain exact values in static proportional symbol maps 
using circle sizes & color scales. 
 
3. Linked Micromaps 
Building on the context provided by Sections 1 and 2, the remainder of this article is focused on the 
graphical displays from the R micromapST package, which is used for visualizing statistics linked 
to the 50 US states and Washington, DC. The micromapST graphics follow the main elements of 
linked micromaps, which are described next.  
Linked micromaps consist of at least three vertical columns containing (1) a color legend 
indicating each areal unit, (2) a series of small maps of the overall geographical area (e.g., the US) 
with colored or highlighted regions indicating the current row (e.g., a state), and (3) a statistic 
(e.g., response rate). See Figure 4 for an example of a linked micromap showing 2022 unit-level 
ACS household response rates for each state. Note that the statistic of interest is ordered (response 
rate), and that the color of the regions is meant to connect the statistic across the rows to the 
region.  
The regions are organized into perceptual groups (using the default in micromapST) to make it 
easier to understand the graphic and to extract useful information. The US regions are readily 
divided in a rather pleasing and intuitive way. First, they are divided according to the median 
value of the ordered statistic, with 25 regions above and 25 below. Those are further subdivided 
into groups of five. Note that the state with the median sorted variable is in its own group. 
Showing just five states in each map/group helps the viewer more easily identify the states, 
especially the small ones like Rhode Island or Washington, DC that are easier to miss in a single 
choropleth of all states.  
Figure 4 shows just one type of plot for a statistic, which is a dot plot. The micromapST package 
allows for the following types of graphics: arrows, bars, boxplots, dots, scatter plots, and time series. 
Some examples of these will be given in Section 4. Furthermore, more than one statistic (i.e., column 
of data or statistics) can be shown in the linked micromaps graphic. More information on the 
package, available plot types, glyphs, examples, and other options (e.g., conveying uncertainty) can 
be found in Pickle, et al. (2015). 
 
4. Applications 
4.1 American Community Survey Response Rates 
The American Community Survey (ACS) is an annual survey that collects information on the nation 
and its people, generating data on demographics, economics, housing, and more. Unfortunately, 
response rates for the ACS have been falling, as is the case with many government surveys today. 
Thus, survey managers have interest in understanding factors that may be associated with , which 
may point toward possible mitigation options.  Exploring the unit-level ACS household response 
rates using linked micromaps can provide potentially useful insights for this purpose.  
Unit-level ACS household response rates for each state and over time are publicly available on the 
following US Census Bureau site: 
www.census.gov/acs/www/methodology/sample-size-and-data-quality/response-rates/  
One can view and download response rates for the nation as a whole or by states from 2000 to 2023. 
Response rates and reasons for non-interviews are displayed on the website in tabular form. One 
can either see the national response rates over time (temporal distribution of response rates for the 
nation as a whole) or the response rates for each state in a single year (spatial distribution for a given 
year). In other words, the commonly used tables show the marginal distribution over time or space 
but do not readily support exploration of the joint distribution of these rates over both space and 
time.  
This shows some of the limitations of using tables and where linked micromaps can help display 
information on multiple aspects of the data. Figures 4 and 5 show a linked micromap depicting the 
unit-level ACS household response rates for a single year–2022. It seems odd that the highest 
response rates are for Utah and Idaho, while the lowest response rate is for Washington, DC. While 
there are many factors at play that might affect response rates (e.g., demographics, economics), one 
might expect a region like Washington, DC containing primarily government activities would have 
a higher response rate to a government survey. 
 Another relevant question for survey managers may be: “How do the response rates vary over time 
and space?” One of the plot types in the micromapST package is a time series. A column showing 
the response rates from 2010 through 2022 was added to the linked micromaps plot (see Figure 6). 
The time series plots help convey information over space (the states) and time. Two interesting years 
are immediately apparent. There is an obvious dip in response rates in 2013, which was mostly due 
to a two-week government shutdown. A more extreme dip in response rates happened in 2020,3 
which was mostly due to COVID-19 quarantines, lockdowns, and other data collection interruptions 
in ACS operations. It is interesting to note that the states suffering the lowest COVID-19 drops in 
response rates also displayed relatively slow trajectories of recovery. 
Survey managers may also want to understand the relationship between certain characteristics or 
beliefs and potential trends in response rates. For example, a possible reason for not responding to 
 
3 https://www.census.gov/library/working-papers/2021/acs/2021_CensusBureau_01.html 
the ACS is anti-government sentiment. The Pew Research Center conducted the Religious 
Landscape Study in 2014.4 One of the questions asked respondents: “If you had to choose, would 
you rather have a smaller government providing fewer services, or a bigger government providing 
more services?”; i.e., did they like big government or small government? The percent pro small 
government can be used as a potential indicator of anti-government sentiment. To explore this, 
Figure 7 linked micromaps that include the state level “pro small government” proportions from the 
2014 Pew Research study, along with the 2022 state-level unit-level ACS household response rates, 
and the state-level declines in response rates between 2010 and 2022.The linked micromaps do not 
display an obvious relationship between the response rate patterns and the Pew Research sentiment 
statistics. In addtion, Washington, DC stands out as an outlier, in that it has the lowest response rate 
and the lowest percentage pro small government (meaning it is generally pro large government), 
with both values somewhat different from other states.  
 
4.2 Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages – During the Early COVID-19 Years 
The next example of linked micromaps uses data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The 
Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) publishes state level data on the BLS website 
and is publicly available for download. The QCEW has quarterly state and county level data for 
numerous industries, for both employment and wages, as well as ownership (private or government). 
After looking at the unit-level ACS household response rates over time, it seemed that there might 
be a story to tell regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and employment. How did reported 
employment change during the early years of the pandemic? Did those changes show different 
patterns across different industries? Were the patterns of change similar across states? After looking 
at several industries, a decision was made to focus on the Leisure and Hospitality industry, which 
displayed notable decreases in employment near the beginning of the pandemic in March 2020. 
An interactive tool (https://data.bls.gov/maps/cew/us) for QCEW state level data allows a user to 
choose an industry and specific series variable to extract. The results can then be rendered in a 
choropleth map and summary table. At the bottom of the page is a link to download the data shown 
in the map.  
As discussed in a previous section, choropleth maps have some limitations. For example, we are 
interested in how the employment statistics change over time. Using choropleth maps, we would 
need to show a series of choropleth maps at different time points. Figure 8 shows such a series of 
maps obtained using the QCEW tool, where four choropleth maps at different points in time are 
displayed, each one showing the 12-month percent change in employment for the Leisure and 
Hospitality industry. Readers can generate these maps easily on the QCEW site.  
The map on the upper left is for Quarter 4 of 2019 (12-month percent change from December 2018 
to December 2019), right before the pandemic and subsequent quarantines. Note that the blueish 
colors represent a positive change over the most recent 12-month period. The yellow and orangey 
colors represent a decrease in employment over the most recent 12-month period. From the colors, 
it can be observed that employment numbers were on the rise for the vast majority of the states in 
Quarter 4 of 2019.  
The map on the upper right is Quarter 1 of 2020 (March). Recall that this is when the pandemic hit, 
and widespread closures ensued. An immediate downturn in the employment number in Leisure and 
Hospitality for almost all states can be seen by the large number of yellow and orange states, 
showing an immediate effect on employment in this industry. The lower left is a year later for 
Quarter 1 of 2021 (12-month percent change from March 2020 to March 2021), and now all states 
 
4 https://www.pewresearch.org/dataset/pew-research-center-2014-u-s-religious-landscape-study/ 
are showing a negative change (all yellow-orange colors). However, the story changes only one 
quarter later (Quarter 2 of 2021) with recovery in employment beginning in many states, roughly 
coincident with the widespread introduction of COIVD-19 vaccines (Watson, et al., 2022).  
It is difficult to see in these plots (readers can generate these maps easily on the QCEW site), but 
the color scales for each of these maps is different, making it hard to compare actual quantitative 
differences across the maps from color alone. For example, dark orange does not have the same 
numerical range across the maps. We only know it corresponds to the largest negative change for 
that quarter and year. Also, this graphic represents four different snapshots in time from the webpage 
that have been copied and pasted together, and resolution is poor. It would be preferable to be able 
to display the data in a true time series fashion where the relevant statistics are presented with a 
single legend to allow for true comparisons. A story of the effects of the pandemic on the Leisure 
and Hospitality industry employment situation can be told using choropleth maps, but it is not easily 
done. 
The same data will now be visualized using the micromapST package. In Figure 9, the states have 
been sorted based on the 2020 Q1 Over-the-Year Change for the Leisure and Hospitality industry. 
This clearly shows similar information to the choropleth maps – that the downturn in Leisure and 
Hospitality jobs was almost immediate across the US. However, the linked micromaps provide 
information on the values (no longer referencing an interval) and magnitudes of the change. For 
example, we see that Idaho, Wyoming, and Montana were the top three states showing an increased 
percentage of reported employment in Leisure and Hospitality.  
We highlighted some interesting features or patterns in the same linked micromaps as shown in 
Figure 10. The first statistical column shows a time series of the over-the-year change from 2020 to 
2022. The last data column displays arrows indicating the difference in one-year employment from 
the start of the pandemic to recovery in 2022 (Q1). Some interesting behaviors that policymakers 
might want to explore are highlighted (circled) in the figure. For example, Arizona had some 
extreme swings in employment over the period, as seen in the time series column, and Washington, 
DC had the largest percent change in employment. Linked micromaps give the user the ability to 
explore and gain insights on how the pandemic affected employment across the nation and through 
time. 
 
4.3 Economic Research Service Food Atlas 
The next example is taken from the Economic Research Service’s (ERS) Food Environment Atlas 
website www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-environment-atlas/go-to-the-atlas/. The objectives 
of the atlas are: 
• 
“To assemble statistics on food environment indicators to stimulate research on the 
determinants of food choices and diet quality, and 
• 
To provide a spatial overview of a community's ability to access healthy food and its 
success in doing so.”5  
The ERS Food Environment Atlas features a plethora of variables, each of which the user can choose 
for the production of a choropleth map of the data, one variable at a time. Some variables feature 
data from one year, some of them offer an average over a certain number of years, some of them 
show the change over time, and so forth. Some are at the state level, and some are at the county 
level. While this atlas offers a wealth of information, it is arguably difficult to use choropleth maps 
to explore relationships among the variables, because each choropleth map from the Atlas is limited 
 
5 https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-environment-atlas/ 
to one variable. For example, Figure 11 depicts two maps: a state-level choropleth map showing 
food insecurity (percent three-year average), and another map shows population totals with low 
access to stores at the county level. If the user wanted to explore the relationship between two or 
more variables, then they must compare two or more choropleth maps. Recall from the QCEW 
example that this can be difficult to do. 
ERS data used in the Food Environment Atlas was then explored with the help of linked micromaps. 
The mission of the ERS is to “anticipate trends and emerging issues in agriculture, food, the 
environment, and rural America and to conduct high-quality, objective economic research to inform 
and enhance public and private decision making.”6 Using data as evidence for making and assessing 
policy is critical, and finding relationships and interesting phenomena (hot spots, extremes, etc.) 
through data visualizations is a key step in understanding situations.  
One government food assistance program is SNAP (Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program). 
Simply put, this program puts food dollars in the hands of people who need it to improve their 
health by eating nutritious food. Food insecurity is the condition of not having access to sufficient 
food, or food of an adequate quality, to meet one's basic needs. Policymakers might ask “How 
might changes in SNAP participation impact Food Insecurity?” We can explore potential 
relationships between SNAP participation and food insecurity using linked micromaps, as shown 
in Figure 12, which displays the percent change in SNAP participation from 2012 to 2017 as dots. 
The change in 3-year average in household food insecurity is shown as bars in the last column. 
Food insecurity for most states decreased, except for New York, Nevada, Pennsylvania, and 
Maine. Policymakers might want to look closely at what happened in New York, since that state 
had the largest increase in food insecurity, as well as Nevada and Pennsylvania since those two 
states had positive changes in food insecurity, i.e., there were more food insecure households, 
despite more households participating in SNAP.  
Another linked micromap showing ERS data is given in Figure 13. This graphic shows some of the 
other glyphs one can use with linked micromaps: boxplots and scatterplots. Policymakers might ask 
“Is there a relationship between Low Access to Food Stores and Food Insecurity? If Access to Stores 
is improved, might that affect Food Insecurity?” The sort variable in this plot is the change in Food 
Insecurity between two time periods. The first column shows boxplots of the county level Percent 
Change in Low Access to Stores from 2010 to 2015. These boxplots help users understand the 
distributions of the statistic over the counties (i.e., skewed, symmetric), the dispersion, and a 
measure of location (the median). The last column shows a scatterplot of 2015 Percent Food Insecure 
as a function of the 2015 Percent of Households with Low Access to Stores. There does not seem to 
be a relationship between them. However, one can see some interesting states highlighted with 
circles. The statistics for Alaska and Washington, DC seem to be different from the rest of the nation, 
which is readily apparent in linked micromaps. They are both extreme points in the scatterplots for 
access to stores, and the boxplot for Alaska is highly skewed. Policymakers might want to look more 
closely at these areas for additional insights. 
 
5. Discussion 
Linked micromaps are a way to summarize statistical information tied to spatial areas, such as 
countries, states, counties, etc. The R micromap package (Payton, et al., 2015) provides functions 
for producing linked micromaps for a given geography or spatial areal unit. The micromapST R 
package (Pickle, et al., 2015) was specifically written for data associated with the 51 US states and 
was the focus of this work. In this article, we showed how linked micromaps address many of the 
 
6 https://www.ers.usda.gov/about-ers/ 
limitations found in the usual ways of displaying such data (e.g., bar plots, choropleth maps) through 
several real-world examples. The reader is encouraged to consult the open-access article by Pickle, 
et al. (2015) for more details on using the micromapST package and the many ways it can be used 
to explore US state-level statistics.   
 
References 
Carr, D. B., Pierson, S. (1996). Emphasizing Statistical Summaries and Showing Spatial Context 
with Micromaps. Statistical Computing & Graphics Newsletter, 7, 16-23. 
https://mason.gmu.edu/~dcarr/lib/v7n3.pdf (accessed September 27, 2024) 
Carr, Daniel G. and Pickle, Linda W. (2010). Visualizing Data Patterns with Micromaps, 
Chapman and Hall CRC Press.  
Oster A.M., Kang G.J., Cha A.E., et al. Trends in Number and Distribution of COVID-19 Hotspot 
Counties — United States, March 8–July 15, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020; 
69:1127–1132. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6933e2. 
Payton, Q. C., McManus, M. G., Weber, M. H., Olsen, A. R., & Kincaid, T. M. (2015). 
micromap: A Package for Linked Micromaps. Journal of Statistical Software, 63(2), 1–16. 
https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v063.i02. 
Pickle, L. W., Pearson, J. B., & Carr, D. B. (2015). micromapST: Exploring and Communicating 
Geospatial Patterns in US State Data. Journal of Statistical Software, 63(3), 1–25. 
https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v063.i03.  
Robbins, N.B. (2013). Creating More Effective Graphs, Chart House.Watson, Oliver J et al., 
(2022) Global impact of the first year of COVID-19 vaccination: a mathematical modelling study, 
The Lancet Infectious Diseases, Volume 22, Issue 9, 1293 - 1302 
 
Figure 1. Default bar chart in MS Excel of the ACS response rates for 2022 where the bars are ordered 
alphabetically by state. Note that only every other bar is labeled, and it is difficult to understand the 
distribution of the response rates over the states. SOURCE: American Community Survey, US Census Bureau, 
https://www.census.gov/acs/www/methodology/sample-size-and-data-quality/response-rates/. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
AL
CA
DC
ID
KS
MD
MS
NV
NY
OK
SC
UT
WV
ACS Response Rates 2022
 
 
Figure 2. Example of a choropleth map where the color corresponds to the value of a statistic (total 
employment). SOURCE: Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
https://data.bls.gov/maps/cew/us. 
 
 
Figure 3. This is an example of a bubble map, where the size of the bubbles and color represent statistics of 
interest. This is a static version of the interactive map that can be viewed at the link provided. SOURCE: US 
Census Bureau https://www.census.gov/library/visualizations/interactive/annual-new-privately-owned-
housing-units.html  
 
Figure 4 This is an example of linked micromaps created using the micromapST package. It shows the ACS 
2022 response rates for each state and Washington, DC. The general elements of linked micromaps are 
identified. SOURCE: American Community Survey, US Census Bureau https://www.census.gov/programs-
surveys/acs. 
 
Figure 5. This shows the three groups with the lowest response rates for the 2022 ACS, taken from the linked 
micromaps in Figure 4. These areas may be of special interest for further investigation. 
 
Figure 6. This linked micromaps graphic has an additional column–a unit-level ACS household response rate 
time series for each state from 2010 to 2022. Two interesting years are clearly visible: the dip in rates for 
2013, in which a two-week government shutdown occurred, and 2020 showing the impact from the COVID-
19 pandemic.  Note the different way to depict the sub-regions in the small maps (Pickle, et al., 2015) 
showing cumulative information for the ordered statistic. SOURCE: American Community Survey, US Census 
Bureau https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs. 
 
Figure 7. Here is a linked micromaps graphic with an additional column of bars indicating the decrease the 
unit-level ACS household rate in percentage points between 2010 and 2022. The final column presents state-
level attitudes toward government as reflected in Pew Research Center (2014). There does not seem to be a 
relationship between the response rates and the attitudinal measure (first and third columns with summary 
statistics).  Washington, DC is interesting. It has the lowest response rate and the smallest attitude measure. 
Note the different way to depict the cumulative information connected to the sub-regions in the small maps 
(Pickle, et al., 2015). SOURCE: American Community Survey, US Census Bureau www.census.gov, Pew 
Research Center https://www.pewresearch.org. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. This is a series of choropleth maps showing the over-the-year change in employment in the Leisure and Hospitality Industry, as measured in the QCEW. The upper left is 
Q4 2019; the upper right is Q1 2020 (when the impact of COVID-19 started); the bottom left is Q1 2021 (one year later); and the bottom right is Q2 2021 (one quarter later). The 
yellow-orange values indicate decreases in employment, and the blue represents increases in employment. One can only determine increases and decreases by the colors, not 
actual values. Further complicating the comparisons across time, the color thresholds (intervals) are different for each map. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics, QCEW 
www.bls.gov.  
 
Figure 9. The statistics are ordered by the over-the-year change in employment for the Leisure and 
Hospitality Industry for the change from 2019 Q1 to 2020 Q1. A time series of these one-year changes for the 
quarters between Q1 2020 and Q1 2022 are shown, where one can see a spike (increase) in employment in 
early 2021 showing some recovery in employment, which then leveled off. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, QCEW www.bls.gov. 
 
 
Figure 10. This shows the same linked micromaps as in Figure 9, where some interesting changes are 
highlighted. Looking at the time series, Arizona and North Carolina had some extreme changes in 
employment during the period. From the arrows showing the percentage point change in the third column, 
Washington, DC had the largest change. Decision and policy makers might want to investigate these 
interesting phenomena. SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics, QCEW www.bls.gov. 
 
Figure 11. Here are two examples of choropleth maps copied from the ERS Food Environment Atlas. At the 
top is a choropleth map at the state level showing household food insecurity, while the bottom shows a 
county-level choropleth map displaying the population with low access to stores. SOURCE: Economic 
Research Service Food Environment Atlas https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-environment-atlas/. 
 
 
 
Figure 12. This linked micromaps graphic illustrates the relationship (if any) between measures of SNAP 
participation and food insecurity. This displays the percent change in SNAP from 2012 to 2017 as dots 
(middle panel) and the change in 3-year average in household food insecurity as bars (right panel). Food 
insecurity for most states decreased, as did SNAP participation. Based on the bar plot, policymakers might 
want to look closely at New York, as that state had a large increase in reported food insecurity. Three out of 
the five states with increases in SNAP participation also had decreases in food insecurity, which could also be 
explored further by policymakers. SOURCE: Economic Research Service Food Environment Atlas 
https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-environment-atlas/. 
 
 
 
Figure 13. This graphic shows two additional ways to display statistics linked to the micromaps: boxplots and 
scatterplots. Policymakers might want to explore the relationship between low access to stores and food 
insecurity. The first data column displays boxplots of the county level change in access to stores, which 
indicate the distributions of the statistic, the dispersion, and the median. The last column shows a scatterplot 
of 2015 Food Insecurity as a function of Low Access to Stores, where there does not seem to be a strong 
relationship between them at the state level of aggregation. Some interesting states are circled.  Alaska and 
Washington, DC are both extreme points in the scatterplots for access to stores, and the boxplot for Alaska is 
highly skewed. Decision makers might look to these areas for policy insights. SOURCE: Economic Research 
Service Food Environment Atlas https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-environment-atlas/. 
 
