Quantum Embedding of Non-local Quantum Many-body Interactions in Prototypal
Anti-tumor Vaccine Metalloprotein on Near Term Quantum Computing Hardware
Elena Chachkarova
King’s College London, Theory and Simulation of Condensed Matter (TSCM),
The Strand, London WC2R 2LS, UK, Email: elena.chachkarova@kcl.ac.uk
Terence Tse
King’s College London, Theory and Simulation of Condensed Matter (TSCM),
The Strand, London WC2R 2LS, UK, Email: wai hei terence.tse@kcl.ac.uk
Yordan Yordanov
Alumni - Cambridge University, Cavendish Laboratory,
Cambridge CB3 0HE, UK, Email: yy387@cam.ac.uk
Yao Wei
King’s College London, Theory and Simulation of Condensed Matter (TSCM),
The Strand, London WC2R 2LS, UK, Email: yao.wei@kcl.ac.uk
Cedric Weber
King’s College London, Theory and Simulation of Condensed Matter (TSCM),
The Strand, London WC2R 2LS, UK, Email: cedric.weber@kcl.ac.uk
The real world obeys quantum physics and quantum computing presents an alternative way to
map physical problems to systems that follow the same laws.
Such computation fundamentally
constitutes a better way to understand the most challenging quantum problems. One such problem
is the accurate simulation of highly correlated quantum systems. Due to the high dimensionality of
the problem classical computers require considerable computer power to accurately predict material
properties, especially when strong electron interactions are present.
Still, modern day quantum
hardware has many limitations and only allows for modeling of very simple systems.
Here we
present for the first time a quantum computer model simulation of a complex hemocyanin molecule,
which is an important respiratory protein involved in various physiological processes such as oxygen
transport and immune defence, and is also used as a key component in therapeutic vaccines for
cancer. To better characterise the mechanism by which hemocyanin transports oxygen, variational
quantum eigensolver (VQE) based on fermionic excitations and quantum embedding methods is
used in the context of dynamic mean field theory to solve Anderson impurity model (AIM). Finally,
it is concluded that the magnetic structure of hemocyanin is largely influenced by the many-body
correction and that the computational effort for solving correlated electron systems could be sub-
stantially reduced with the introduction of quantum computing algorithms. We encourage the use
of the Hamiltonian systems presented in this paper as a benchmark for testing quantum computing
algorithms efficiency for chemistry applications.
Keywords: Quantum Computing; Variational Quantum Eigensolver; Entanglement; Anderson Impurity Model
I.
INTRODUCTION
Quantum computing introduced a new approach in
solving challenging computational problems that are dif-
ficult for classical computers [1, 2]. Development in the
field of quantum algorithms as well as quantum hard-
ware has captured the interest of many large companies
as well as academic researchers. Limitations of modern
day quantum hardware referred to as noisy intermediate-
scale quantum (NISQ) devices are being tackled at speed
with the utilisation of error mitigation techniques [3–5]
and error corrections [6, 7]. The current progress in the
development of robust quantum hardware [8–12] could
soon lead to quantum algorithms outperforming the best-
known classical algorithms for solving difficult problems
with large parameter spaces. Such problems include inte-
ger factorisation [13, 14], financial portfolio optimisation
[15, 16] and fraud detection [17], simulation of quantum
systems [1, 2, 18–22] and more.
Quantum chemistry is a focus area where quantum
computing can overcome many limitations of classical
algorithms that become restricted due to the high de-
gree of complexity of the underlying physical processes
[23–25]. For instance, calculating molecular energies to
within chemical accuracy requires an exponential scaling
of computational resources and large systems are primar-
ily tackled by costly experimental methods. The intro-
duction of robust quantum algorithms to model and solve
electron systems could unleash a new era of material dis-
covery and provide insights into puzzling challenges like
room temperature superconductivity and strongly cor-
related materials modelling. Computation that employs
arXiv:2410.12733v2  [quant-ph]  21 Nov 2024
2
quantum principles is the most fundamental way to find
material characteristics and allows to map electron states
directly onto qubit quantum states which could in many
cases be the most optimal tool for understanding these
systems.
So far, quantum hardware has primarily been used to
explore the ground state properties of relatively simple
molecules with a small number of electrons, such as the
water molecule (H2O) [26, 27] and hydrogen molecules
[28, 29]. This focus is due to the increased noise associ-
ated with using more qubits and applying entanglement.
Recently, there has been growing interest in addressing
the challenges associated with strongly correlated elec-
tron systems, not only for ground state energy estimation
but also for other system characteristics. Notably, work
by Microsoft Azure Quantum has introduced an end-to-
end comprehensive method for simulating strongly cor-
related molecular systems.
This approach leverages a
hybrid classical-quantum method and incorporates the
classical shadows technique [30] for property measure-
ment, all hosted on Microsoft Azure platform [31]. This
paper complements this work by aiming to measure a
complex system and its properties using quantum hard-
ware. To expand the context, Fig. 1 illustrates the evo-
lution of quantum computer-based materials modeling
research across various molecules of different sizes and
complexities, based on data from Table I. To estimate
the ground state energy of these molecules the variational
quantum eigensolver (VQE) method has been employed
[32–36]. VQE is a hybrid algorithm that uses both clas-
sical computers and quantum computers to estimate the
ground state energy of a Hamiltonian. It uses Rayliegh-
Ritz variational principle [37] and can model complex
ground state wavefunctions in a polynomial time using
an ansatz defined by a set of parameters that constitutes
a trial measurement which is fed into a classical optimiser
that iteratively updates the ansatz parameters to reduce
the energy until it converges. The method is sensitive to
the form of the ansatz, topology of the hardware, initial
state and more, but tailoring those provides flexibility
and investigations into VQE simulations can lead to a
recipe for the most optimal problem specific VQE setup.
Here for the first time we present hardware VQE simula-
tion of the complex hemocyanin molecule [38] modelled
by Anderson impurity model (AIM) [39] on IBM Quan-
tum platform [40].
The interest in hemocyanin (abbreviated as Hc) came
from its fascinating properties and applications, for in-
stance, Hc could be a structural part in metallodrug de-
sign but that requires a full understanding of its com-
plex structure which remains challenging to model even
with modern day conventional methods [41].
Hemo-
cyanins are a key component in therapeutic vaccines for
cancer due to their useful carrier qualities [42]. Hemo-
cyanins are also used as nonspecific immunostimulants
for the treatment of superficial bladder cancer (SBC),
for which these glycoproteins have demonstrated several
advantages over more standard immunotherapeutic pro-
FIG. 1. Progression of quantum computing technology from
2013 to 2023, highlighting two key trends: the rapid increase
in the maximum number of qubits available in quantum hard-
ware (shown in red) and the highest number of qubits used
in significant quantum computing based molecule simulation
research papers each year (shown in blue).
Each point in
the research data series is labelled with the specific quan-
tum system studied, providing insight into the scale of quan-
tum experiments and their corresponding hardware capabil-
ities over time. Due to the accumulation of noise, the size
of the molecules studied is not increasing as rapid as the ad-
vancements in hardware capacity. [53]
cedures [43].
Furthermore, the hemocyanin known as
keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH) has been applied in
various in vitro and preclinical studies to determine its
effectiveness against other cancers, such as Barrett’s ade-
nocarcinoma [44]; pancreatic, breast, and prostate cancer
[45]; and melanoma [46, 47].
In nature, Hc is a pro-
tein that transports oxygen in the blood of some inver-
tebrate animals and is more resilient to the surrounding
environment than haemoglobin. Even though it is less
efficient, Hc can be fully functional in low oxygen envi-
ronments and cold as well as hot temperatures of up to
90 °C. Modelling the formation of the oxygenated state
of Hc remains a challenge as the binding of the O2 is a
spin forbidden transition. To model this system a classic
DMFT model [48–50] would be insufficient as it would
treat the Cu atoms separately, and it is believed there
is a superexchange pathway between the Cu d-orbitals
and intermediate O p-orbitals. Hence, a multi-site AIM
is needed to probe the correlated sites directly [51, 52].
There has been work done for the Cu2O cluster model
as shown in the diagram in Fig. 2. It should be noted
that the diagram is for illustrative purposes only, and the
topology shown can be extended to all-to-all connected
models. It can be derived that the Heisenberg antiferro-
magnetic coupling J can be expressed as
J = 4
t4
pd
∆2
 1
Ud
+
1
∆+ Up/2

(1)
Where ∆, tpd, Up, and Ud represent the charge-
transfer energy, Cu-O hopping parameter, and the on-
3
FIG. 2. Diagram illustrating the topology of the Cu2O model,
showing the difference in energy level between bath and impu-
rity sites in the core. Here, the impurities and bath represent
the Cu and O atom sites, respectively
site Coulomb energies at the O and Cu sites respectively
[54]. Hence, we already have an example of an effective
model obtained via embedding, as the bath sites here
represent the O2 bridge of hemocyanin rather than the
oxygen sites of Cu2O. While most molecular systems are
well-captured by DFT (+U) methods [55], some gener-
ate large collections of quantum states and, therefore,
would be captured better through quantum computing.
One such case is transition metal proteins at certain tem-
peratures, where extensive collections of near-degenerate
states exist.
These usually occur in magnetic systems
near a low-to-high spin transition driven by Hund’s cou-
pling. Another case are systems with non-local exchange,
such as the superexchange across bridges of transition
metal centers. For the former case, work has been done
to investigate such systems using quantum methods with
the notable example of iron porphyrin [56].
Readers are strongly encouraged to read the Meth-
ods section before the Results section to understand the
transformation of a molecular Hamiltonian into a mod-
elled AIM Hamiltonian and the construction of VQE sim-
ulation and its components. The Results section presents
the outcomes of the VQE simulation runs for different
VQE setups.
The Discussion section expands on the
meaning of the results and proposes ideas to further the
research.
II.
METHODS
The following investigation utilised a multi-site An-
derson impurity model (AIM) of the Hamiltonian of Hc
molecule developed previously in [75] to measure its
properties on IBM [40] and Quantinuum [74] quantum
machines with different number of qubits and VQE
solver setups. The subsections below identify the steps
to obtain the model Hamiltonian and describe the VQE
algorithm setup.
Molecular Modelling
FIG. 3. Hemocyanin (oxyHc) O2-bound form with active site
Cu2O2 core labelled in blue (the Cu2 center is a dication,
charge not shown).
Due to the complex character of the binding of oxygen
in the formation of oxygenated hemocyanin (oxyHc di-
agram in Fig.
3), most theoretical studies have failed
to correctly predict its properties. Here, we follow steps
from a previous study on Hc [75] that has shown agree-
ment with experimental results.
The work presents a
density functional theory (DFT) + dynamical mean field
theory (DMFT) simulation on a 58-atom model of the
oxyHc.
To accurately characterise the superexchange
mechanism between the Cu2 d-orbitals and intermediate
O p-orbitals, a non-local (cluster) DMFT is employed.
A multi-site Anderson impurity model (AIM) captures
all correlated sites which labels the method better as
DFT+AIM. A self-consistency cycle over the charge den-
sity is performed to ensure a fixed number of electrons.
Anderson impurity model:
To solve with cluster
DMFT [76], we map the hemocyanin core onto an
Anderson-impurity model.
The AIM can be defined as:
HAIM =
X
mnσ

ϵn
mnσa†
mσanσ + ϵa
mnσa†
mσa†
n−σ + h.c.

+
X
miσ
Vmiσ
 a†
mσciσ + h.c.

+ µ
X
iσ
c†
iσciσ +
X
i
U ˆ
ni↓ˆni↑
(2)
The fermionic operators a†
mn (amn) create (destroy) a
particle in the bath, and the fermionic operators c†
i(ci)
create (destroy) a particle in the cluster of impurities.
The indices m, n run over the bath sites, and the in-
dex i is running over the impurity sites, the sites of the
bath are connected by long-range hopping matrix ele-
ments through the particle-hole (particle-particle) chan-
nel ϵn (ϵa ), the non-correlated sites of the bath are also
connected to the correlated impurities by the matrix el-
ements Vmi, the onsite repulsion at the impurity sites is
U, and µ is the chemical potential.
Here, we map the hemocyanin core onto the AIM by
taking the two copper sites as the two impurity sites,
4
Evolution of Quantum Hardware and Molecule Simulations
Year Qubits Systems
Methods
Platform
Hardware Max Qubits Company
2013 2
HeH+
VQE-UCC
Silicon Photonic 2
In-house [57]
2015 2
HeH+
VQE-UCC
Trapped ion
2
IonQ [58]
2015 2
H2
VQE-UCC
Superconducting 9
Google [59]
2016 2
H2, H+
3 , H4
IPEA, VQE-UCC
Silicon photonic 2
In-house [60]
2017 6
H2, LiH, BeH2, Heisenberg model Hardware-efficient VQE
Superconducting 20
IBM [61]
2017 2
H2 (excited states)
Hardware-specific VQE
Superconducting 20
UC Berkeley [62]
2018 3
H2, LiH
VQE-UCC
Trapped-ion
11
Honeywell [63]
2018 4
Quantum magnetism, H2, LiH
Hardware-efficient VQE
Superconducting 20
IBM [64]
2018 4
H2, LiH
Qubit CC
Superconducting 53
Google [65]
2019 2
H2O
QPE
NMR
2
In-house [66]
2019 4
H2O
VQE-UCC
Trapped-ion
11
IonQ [67]
2019 4
NaH, RbH, KH
Hardware-efficient VQE(-UCC) Superconducting 53
ORNL [68]
2019 2
Lithium superoxide dimer
VQE-UCC
Superconducting 53
IBM [69]
2019 3
H3
VQE-UCC
Superconducting 53
Google [70]
2020 12
H6, H8, H10, H12, HNNH
VQE-HF
Superconducting 53
Google [65]
2020 2
PSPCz, 2F-PSPCz, 4F-PSPCz
qEOM-VQE, VQD
Superconducting 127
IBM [71]
2022 28
C2H4
Point Symmetry
Emulator
433
Quantum Emulation Group [72]
2022 72
IrIII Complexes
Point Symmetry
Emulator
1000+
Quantum Emulation Group [73]
2024 6
oxyHc (58-atom model)
VQE-UCC
Superconducting 7
IBM [40]
2024 6
oxyHc (58-atom model)
VQE-UCC
Superconducting 20
Quantinuum [74]
2024 14
oxyHc (58-atom model)
VQE-UCC
Emulator
50+
IBM [40]
TABLE I. Quantum Experiments Summary - Evolution of quantum chemistry molecule simulations on quantum hardware
and emulators from 2013 to the present. The recent entries, highlighted in the table’s final two rows in blue, demonstrate a
consistency in the size of qubits employed but also an expansion to encompass larger molecular systems. [53].
with the dioxygen bridge and imidazole ligands acting as
the bath.
DFT in conjunction with DMFT is used to retrieve the
AIM parameters. Non-spin polarised DFT is carried out
with PBE functionals, with Non-orthogonal Generalized
Wannier Function (NGWF) [77] gradient threshold of 2∗
10−6 [78]. A Hubbard U correction of 10 eV is applied
to all d-orbitals.
DMFT
is
carried
out
with
U=0.29340
Eh
and
Jhund=0.02939, using the Lanczos impurity solver over
2000 Matsubara frequencies and 800000 conjugate gradi-
ent steps [79].
As such, we obtain the interaction parameters and
on-site energies as presented in the Supplementary
information.
Variational Quantum Eigensolver
VQE is based on the Rayliegh-Ritz variational principle
[37] which finds an upper bound estimate of the expec-
tation value of an observable through the application of
a trial wavefunction. In the context of Quantum Chem-
istry this accounts for the optimisation of ground state
energy E0 of a system with Hamiltonian ˆH and a trial
wavefunction |ψtrial⟩, as follows
E0 ⩽⟨ψtrial| ˆH|ψtrial⟩
⟨ψtrial|ψtrial⟩.
(3)
A main part of constructing a robust VQE simula-
tion is choosing a trial wavefunction with an optimal
parametrisation that can bring the value of the ground
state energy estimate to the exact energy within the de-
sired level of precision.
In quantum computation, the
parametrisation step has been in focus of much research
due to the vast number of possibilities from hardware ef-
ficient to problem-tailored trial wavefunction, also called
ansatz wavefunction.
Building an ansatz on a quan-
tum device constitutes the application of quantum gates
which are represented by parameterised unitary opera-
tors, labelled U(θ) applied to N qubits, usually initialised
in state |0 >
N N, where θ is a set of parameters that take
values in the scope (−π, π].
To represent the Hamiltonian in a form directly mea-
surable on a quantum device it is transformed into a
weighted sum of spin operators using a common mapping:
JordanWigner transformation (Jordan and Wigner 1928)
[80]. Qiskit does not provide an out-of-the-box mapper
between OpenFermion [81] fermionic Hamiltonian and
qiskit Pauli strings representation [82] as a feature for
bespoke Hamiltonians, hence we implemented that step
separately. The Hamiltonian is then defined using Pauli
strings of the form ˆ
Pa ∈{I, X, Y, Z}
N N, with N the
number of qubits used to model the wavefunction,
ˆH =
S
X
a
wa ˆ
Pa.
(4)
With this representation Eq. 3 using the AIM Hamilto-
nian, HAIM, can be transformed into
EVQE = min
θ
S
X
a
wa < 0|U †(θ) ˆPaU(θ)|0 >,
(5)
where each Pauli string term < 0|U †(θ) ˆPaU(θ)|0 > is
measured on a quantum device whilst the summation
and minimisation steps are performed on a conventional
computer using a classical optimiser, hence the hybrid
5
FIG. 4.
Schematic representation of the variational quan-
tum eigensolver (VQE) method for minimisation of a molecu-
lar Hamiltonian by adjusting variational parameters, ⃗θ. The
simulation starts by retrieving the molecular Hamiltonian and
mapping it onto a qubit Hamiltonian. Then the chosen ansatz
is applied to the initialised qubit register. After measurements
and computation of the observables new values for the ⃗θ′ are
extracted and fed back to the beginning of the loop.
nature of the quantum computer based VQE simulations.
The full VQE cycle can be seen in Fig. 4.
The design and mapping of the VQE simulation are of
great importance to the quality of the results on mod-
ern day NISQ devices, for instance, the depth of the cir-
cuits and the number of CNOT gates strongly affect the
quantum noise on the measurements with shorter cir-
cuits generally leading to more accurate results.
The
choice of the ansatz is possibly the most important step
of the simulation, as shown in Sec.
III. There are three
main categories of ansatz types and their performance is
strongly dependent on the problem in hand. These in-
clude the Unitary Coupled Cluster (UCC) type ansatz
[83, 84], the Hardware-Efficient Ansatz (HEA) [85–89]
and a third type which is a mixture between UCC and
HEA.
The unitary coupled cluster with singles and double ex-
citations (UCCSD) ansatz [90–92] is a chemistry-inspired
ansatz that incorporates knowledge of the underlying
quantum system with terms in the ansatz representing
specific electronic configurations. The UCCSD trial state
is prepared from a reference state |ϕ0 > by applying ex-
ponentiated excitation operators, with |ϕ0 > commonly
chosen as a HartreeFock mean-field wave function.
ˆT1 =
Nocc
X
i=1
Nvirt
X
a=1
ta
i ˆa†
aˆai
(6)
FIG. 5.
Diagram of EfficientSU2 circuit [93] consisting of
layers of single qubit operations spanned by SU(2) and CX
entanglements [40]. Hardware efficient ansatz applied on 6
qubits.
ˆT2 =
Nocc
X
i,j=1
Nvirt
X
a,b=1
tab
ij ˆa†
aˆa†
bˆajˆai
(7)
Here,
ˆT1 and ˆT2 are the single and double excitation
terms with ˆa† and ˆa being the creation and annihilation
operators, ta
i are the single excitation amplitudes and tab
ij
are the double excitation amplitudes.
Nocc and Nvirt
represent the number of occupied and virtual orbitals,
respectively. For UCCS ansatz only ˆT1 terms are used,
whilst for UCCSD both terms are applied. A second de-
gree truncation of the excitations (UCCSD case) forms
the following trial wavefunction.
ˆT = ˆT1 + ˆT2
(8)
U(⃗θ) = e
ˆT −ˆT †
(9)
|ψtrial >= |ψ(⃗θ) >= e
ˆT −ˆT †|ϕ0 >
(10)
The other type of trial wavefunctions is the hardware-
efficient ansatz. These ansatzes are constructed from a
limited set of gates that are easy to implement on quan-
tum hardware, but have no chemical interpretation. An
example one is the EfficientSU2 ansatz [93], which is used
in this investigation, Fig. 5.
In this work, we compare the accuracy of VQE sim-
ulations on modelled hemocyanin with UCCS, UCCSD,
HEA and bespoke ansatzes. Qiskit implementation al-
lows for adjusting of the ansatz parameters, such as spec-
ifying the set of excitations or selecting spin conserving
excitations only. The variations in the results between
these are presented in the next section.
III.
RESULTS
Ground state energy measurement
We implemented qiskit VQE algorithm on 6, 8, 10, 14
and 16 qubit hemocyanin AIM model Hamiltonians on
IBM quantum simulator with and without noise and
on IBM and Quantinuum quantum hardware. Results
6
FIG. 6. Ground-state energy estimates in Eh for a 6-qubit
hemocyanin model using VQE simulations on both the IBM
Perth hardware and the IBM QASM simulator. Results from
the noiseless simulator converge to the expected outcome
within 120 iterations, demonstrating high accuracy.
Con-
versely, the hardware execution reaches a barren plateau [94],
exhibiting only minimal, continuous decline.
Additionally,
the noisy simulator, employing a noise model replicated from
the actual hardware, fails to identify any feasible solution, at-
tributable to the absence of error mitigation and correction
techniques. In each instance, the setup employed a General-
ized UCCSD ansatz.
in the paper present data from the 6 and 14 qubit
runs to reduce duplication, to access the extra runs
and Hamiltonians consult with the code.
In all cases,
the simulations employed a generalised UCCSD ansatz.
Fig.
6 shows a comparison between the converged
values as well as the exact value. The noisy simulator
(noise mapped from ibm Casablanca) VQE run did
not show convergence without any error mitigation
techniques. The noise in this case is too large compared
to the changes in the energy estimates from the VQE
excitations and the simulation fails to progress. Fig.
7
shows clear convergence on Quantinuum QPU within
0.485% accuracy of the ground state energy estimate.
Ansatz construction
Choosing the most optimal ansatz for a VQE simulation
is of great importance and can considerably change the
final result. In Fig. 8 we present a plot of the model Hc
Hamiltonian ground state energy estimation on an IBM
simulator for different forms of the ansatz: generalised
UCC-S/SD type ansatz, spin conserving UCCSD ansatz
and hardware efficient ansatz;
all compared to the
exact value. As expected the output of the simulation
runs follow different convergence, which testifies for the
strong sensitivity of VQE to the ansatz.
Noise models
Real quantum devices have many sources of error. Pre-
viously, we investigated the effect of mapping the total
noise from a real quantum computer onto a simulator.
This entails mapping the error rates on instructions
FIG. 7. Ground-state energy estimates in Eh for a 6-qubit
hemocyanin model from VQE simulation on Quantinuum
hardware using Microsoft Azure Quantum platform [95]. The
VQE simulation employed a generalised UCCSD ansatz and
SPSA [96] optimiser with maximum iterations set to 10000.
The simulation shows a clear convergence to the exact result
within accuracy of ≈0.485% to the exact value.
FIG. 8. Comparison of ground-state energy estimates in Eh
derived from the incorporation of additional interactions in
the UCC ansatz states, labeled according to ansatz construc-
tion parameters. The Generalised UCCS ansatz identifies a
feasible solution most rapidly. Additionally, the inclusion of
second-order excitations also results in correct convergence.
In contrast, the EfficientSU2 HEA ansatz converges to a bar-
ren plateau. The spin-conserved UCCSD ansatz achieves con-
vergence swiftly probably due to the restricted number of pool
operators, yet it also plateaus.
which are determined by gate times and qubit T1, T2
values, where T1 is an energy relaxation time (the time
taken for the excited |1 state to decay toward the ground
state |0) and T2 is a dephasing time constant.
Here,
we add custom noise to only specific qubits with the
aim to understand better which parts of the simulation
7
FIG. 9. Comparison of ground-state energy estimates in Eh
from various 6-qubit VQE simulation setups utilizing the Gen-
eralised UCCSD ansatz, Hamiltonian Config−A, and specific
VQE parameters. The simulations were subjected to T1/T2
thermal relaxation noise, selectively applied to three differ-
ent sets of qubits: Impurity 1 (qubits 0 and 1), Impurity 2
(qubits 2 and 3), and the Bath (qubits 4 and 5). Consistent
with expectations due to the correlation between Impurity
1 and Impurity 2 sites, noise impacting either set results in
similar values for the ground state energy. Conversely, noise
affecting the Bath sites demonstrates more significant detri-
mental effects on the system’s performance.
FIG. 10. Comparison diagram of ground-state energy devia-
tion in Eh from various 6-qubit VQE simulation setups utiliz-
ing the Generalised UCCSD ansatz, Hamiltonian Config−A,
and specific VQE parameters. The simulations were subjected
to T1/T2 thermal relaxation noise, selectively applied to four
different sets of qubits: Impurity 1 (qubits 0 and 1); Impurity
2 (qubits 2 and 3); Impurity 1 and Impurity 2 (qubits 0, 1,
2 and 3); and the Bath (qubits 4 and 5). Consistent with
expectations due to the correlation between Impurity 1 and
Impurity 2 sites, noise impacting either or even both sets re-
sults in similar values for the ground state energy. Conversely,
noise affecting the Bath sites demonstrates more significant
detrimental effects on the system’s performance.
FIG. 11. Log-log plot illustrating the difference between the
exact ground state energy, EGS, in Eh and noisy VQE simu-
lation outcomes across a spectrum of uniform depolarization
error rates, ranging from 10−1 to 10−5. Each simulation was
aligned with the coupling map of IBM Casablanca to reflect
the realistic connectivity between qubits. These ground-state
energy estimates were derived from identical 6-qubit VQE
simulation configurations employing a Generalised UCCSD
ansatz, Hamiltonian Config-A, and specified VQE parame-
ters.
The observed linear dependence on the log-log scale
indicates a systematic and predictable influence of depolar-
ization errors on simulation accuracy with a slope of approx-
imately 2.01.
FIG. 12. Percentage deviations of noiseless to noisy spin-spin
correlation (⟨Sz[i] ∗Sz[j]⟩) estimates from VQE simulation
outcomes across a spectrum of uniform depolarization error
rates, ranging from 10−1 to 10−5 versus ground state energy,
EGS, deviations for the same level of noise.
Each simula-
tion was aligned with the coupling map of IBM Casablanca
to reflect the realistic connectivity between qubits. The sim-
ulation configurations employ a Generalised UCCSD ansatz,
Hamiltonian Config-A, and specified VQE parameters. The
observed nonlinear relationship in the plot suggests that the
correlation results are significantly less stable than the ground
state energy estimates when the same level of noise is present.
Exponential fit is added for reference.
8
cause higher instabilities.
We applied T1/T2 thermal
relaxation noise to the qubits that represent impurity
1, impurity 2, both impurities sites (1 and 2) and the
bath site in turn. The Hamiltonian was mapped into the
Config −A configuration, reference Fig. 14, in all four
cases. Results from the simulations are in Fig.
9 and
Fig. 10.
Definitions of T1 and T2
T1 and T2 values for the qubits are generated randomly
based on a normal distribution, where T1 averages 50
microseconds with a standard deviation of 10 microsec-
onds, and T2 averages 70 microseconds with a standard
deviation of 10 microseconds.
Truncation of T2 Values
It is physically inferred for T2 to be at most twice T1
(since T2 involves both relaxation and other dephasing
effects), thus T2 values are truncated to be no more than
twice their corresponding T1 values for each qubit.
Quantum Gate and Measurement Times
Instruction Times: These are the durations for each type
of quantum operation in nanoseconds. For example, the
U2 gate which involves a single X90 pulse takes 50 ns,
and the U3 gate which involves two X90 pulses takes
100 ns. Longer operations like measurement and reset
are set to 1000 ns (1 microsecond).
Creation of Quantum Errors
Thermal
Relaxation
Errors:
Using
the
thermal relaxation error(t1, t2, time)
func-
tion from Qiskits Aer module to simulate quantum
noise [97], thermal relaxation errors are created for each
quantum operation based on their durations and the T1
and T2 values of each qubit.
Noise Model Analysis
System Noise for 6 Qubit Hc Hamiltonian: By utilizing
the cluster Hamiltonian (Equation 11) derived from the
one-band and three-band Hubbard models of cuprates
[98], we can map the hemocyanin Hamiltonian to com-
pute the Heisenberg exchange coupling, J, with the aim
to examine how the system varies with noise introduced
by different parameters, as described in Equation 12,
where site labels i = 1, 2 are for impurity 1 and 2 and
i = 3 for the bath.
ˆH = ∆
2 ∗(n3 −n1 −n2) −tpd
X
i,σ
(d†
iσpσ + H.c.)+
Ud ∗(n1↑n1↓+ n2↑n2↓) + Up ∗n3↑n3↓
(11)
where nd = d†
iσdiσ (for i = 1, 2), n3σ = p†
σpσ, and
ni = ni↑+ ni↓+ 2tpd
 1
J
 
1 −1
2

iσ
Here, d†
iσ creates a hole with a z component of spin σ =
±1 in the impurities site i (i = 1, 2), and p† creates a hole
with a z component of spin σ = ±1 in the bath site. The
charge-transfer energy is ∆and Up and Ud are the on-
site Coulomb energies at the bath and impurities sites,
respectively, and finally, tpd is the strength of hopping
between neighboring bath and impurities sites.
J =
4t4
pd
∆2
 1
Ud
+ 1
∆

(12)
Ebath ≈−0.0633Eh
(13)
Eimp1 ≈−0.2842Eh
(14)
Eimp2 ≈−0.2633Eh
(15)
where Ebath, Eimp1 and Eimp2 are the bath and impuri-
ties onsite energies, respectively.
∆= Ebath −Eimp1 + Eimp2
2
≈0.2104Eh
(16)
Ud ≈0.2934Eh; tpd ≈0.0578Eh; Up ≈0Eh
(17)
Assuming noisy ∆′ and t′
pd of the form below:
∆′ = ∆+ GaussianNoise × Amplitude
(18)
t′
pd = tpd + GaussianNoise × Amplitude
(19)
We anticipate that the effects on J from the noisy terms
above will exhibit the following characteristics, Equation
21 and Equation 24, with steps to get to the results.
Using the binomial expansion for (tpd + δ)4:
(tpd + δ)4 ≈t4
pd + 4t3
pdδ
(20)
where δ = GaussianNoise × Amplitude.
For noisy tpd term, the effect on J is:
J′ ≈
4

t4
pd + 4t3
pdδ

∆2
 1
Ud
+ 1
∆

(21)
And for noisy ∆term, the effect on J is as follows.
Using Taylor expansions for the quadratic term:
(∆+ δ)2 ≈∆2 + 2∆δ
(22)
9
where δ = GaussianNoise × Amplitude.
For
1
∆+δ:
1
∆+ δ ≈1
∆−δ
∆2
(23)
Finally, we arrive at:
J′ ≈
4t4
pd
∆2

1 −2 δ
∆
  1
Ud
+ 1
∆−δ
∆2

(24)
Due to the size of the onsite bath energy, Equation 13,
compared to the impurities’ energies in Equation 14 and
Equation 15, it is expected that ∆would not be strongly
affected by the noise on the bath site qubits.
Taking
into account Equation 12 and that Ud would also not
be affected by bath site noise, we can conclude that we
expect J reaction to bath noise to be dominated by the
tpd term. On the other hand, for noise on the impurities,
Equation 24 and Equation 21 show that competing effects
from ∆, Ud and tpd are expected to reduce the overall
noise. This effect is depicted in both Fig. 9 and Fig. 10,
with noisy bath simulations clearly showing higher error
levels for the ground state energy estimations compared
to noisy impurity sites.
In a different approach, in Fig. 11 and Fig. 12 we in-
vestigated the effects of different levels of depolarisation
error (probability of depolarising) applied to all 6 qubits
on a simulator with coupling map set to ibm Casablanca.
In real quantum systems, both amplitude damping (T1)
and phase damping (T2) contribute to the overall error
in a quantum state. Depolarising error can be seen as a
phenomenological model that encapsulates the net effect
of these noises when the detailed behavior of each is not
crucial for the high-level simulation. It randomly maps
the state of a qubit to the maximally mixed state with a
certain probability, thus capturing the overall likelihood
of a qubit being in an erroneous state due to any noise.
Hardware topology
Quantum computing holds immense opportunity for
accessing new ways of computation, but current NISQ
devices suffer from many limitations due to the early
stage of the field. In classical computation the design of
the underlying hardware is abstracted away for the user
and operations and measurements do not vary based on
the environment of the instantaneous runs, but produce
a deterministic outcome. On the contrary, NISQ devices
show large differences between the same Hamiltonian
measurements with different topology mapping or even
for the same mapping and the same hardware but on
different days. To investigate the level of sensitivity to
the topology of the quantum hardware, we performed
ground state energy optimisation on different topology
mappings. Due to the strong correlation effects in Hc we
expected to observe differences in the results stemming
from not total connectivity between the qubits.
The
topology mappings focused on increasing the physical
FIG. 13. Illustration of the coupling map of IBM Oslo quan-
tum hardware, delineating which qubits have direct connec-
tivity with each other. Qubits that are not directly connected
are also indicated, providing a comprehensive view of the
inter-qubit relationships within this quantum hardware con-
figuration.
FIG. 14. Qubit mappings of Anderson impurity model of Hc
molecule with two impurities (blue spheres) and one bath site
(red spheres). The configurations mark different ordering of
the sites onto the underlying hardware with the same coupling
map, reference Fig.
13.
distance and ”quantum” path between the 2 impurity
sites, as those are crucial for representing modelled Hc
accurately, results are presented in Fig. 15.
Onsite potential
The
complex
Hc
superexchange
Cu-O-Cu
pathway
has been investigated extensively due to its inter-
esting character.
Variation in the distance between
the mean position of the two copper atoms and the
mean position of the two oxygen atoms has shown a
singlet-to-triplet transition that occurs at R = 0.6A,
where R = | 1
2 ∗(rCuA + rCuB) −1
2 ∗(rO1 + rO2)|
[75]. To investigate this transition we varied the onsite
potential U which accounts for a similar calculation
as varying R.
Fig.
16 shows the ground state con-
10
FIG. 15.
Comparison of ground-state energy estimates in
Eh derived from different topological mappings of a 6-qubit
hemocyanin Hamiltonian onto the qubits. The labels of the
configurations correlate to the mappings illustrated in Fig.
14, and each simulation employed a Generalised UCCSD
ansatz with the same coupling map as shown in Fig.
13.
Notably, Config −C, which positions the two impurities fur-
thest apart, exhibits the highest error, as anticipated due to
the limited connectivity between the most correlated sites of
the Hamiltonian. The other two configurations yield similar
results, demonstrating the impact of qubit arrangement on
simulation accuracy.
FIG. 16. Ground-state energy estimates in Eh of Hc 14-qubit
mapped Hamiltonian for different values of the onsite po-
tential U in eV .
VQE simulation setup using Generalised
UCCSD ansatz. As expected largest error in the graph is the
U = 6eV simulation, which is the suggested point of singlet-
triplet transition from [75].
vergence of VQE runs for 3 values of the onsite potential.
Correlation
Conventional many body methods struggle to correctly
predict Hc properties due to the complexity of the su-
perexchange pathway between the Cu d-orbitals and in-
termediate O p-orbitals. The AIM model showed a strong
TABLE II. Hemocyanin AIM impurities Spin-Spin cor-
relation measurements 6 Qubits
Spin-Spin Correlation
Topology
VQE Setup
⟨Sz[i] ∗Sz[j]⟩
Exact
-0.307
Config-A Spin-conserved UCCSD
-0.314
Config-A
UCCS
-0.248
Config-A
Generalised UCCSD
-0.169
Config-B
Generalised UCCSD
-0.018
Config-C
Generalised UCCSD
-0.078
TABLE III. The simulation of hemocyanin using the
Generalized UCCSD ansatz with the Config −A map-
ping resulted in energy estimates closest to the exact
value, based on the following operator counts.
Generalised UCCSD Config −A
Operator
Count
U2 Gate
288
CNOT Gate (Controlled-NOT)
280
U1 Gate
184
U Gate
4
correlation between the 2 impurity sites that is difficult to
represent on a classical computer simulation, but trivial
to map onto qubit interaction terms. Table II represents
a comparison between spin-spin correlation measurement
for different VQE setups that outlines the sensitivity to
the topology mapping of the Hamiltonian and to the form
of the ansatz. Furthermore, Fig.
12 shows the effect of
same levels of depolarisation noise on both ground state
energy estimation and impurity spin-spin correlation to
assess the stability to noise when measuring properties
other than the energy.
IV.
DISCUSSION
Here we investigated the application of VQE method
for characterisation of a prototypal anti-tumor vaccine
metalloprotein (Hc) for the first time on quantum hard-
ware and simulator, reference Fig.
6. Varying the con-
figuration of the VQE setup allowed us to understand
in depth the dynamics of the simulation and the driving
sources of error. Such analysis proves to be promising
for understanding complex entangled systems on quan-
tum devices and their best representation.
With the
steep improvement of tackling noise on these devices and
the growth of the number of qubits and their connec-
tivity in available quantum hardware (Fig.
1) soon it
could be possible to map larger highly correlated sys-
tems directly onto qubits for characterisation. Notable
example of related work is the recently developed end-
to-end quantum simulation workflow by Microsoft Azure
Quantum for chemical systems [31]. Leveraging entan-
gled qubits to model highly correlated electron systems
on quantum hardware offers a substantial enhancement
over traditional computing methods. This is primarily
11
because the underlying principles of quantum mechan-
ics govern both the methodology and the systems under
investigation, ensuring a more natural and accurate rep-
resentation.
As illustrated in Fig. 6, the noiseless simulator’s VQE
run converges to the correct result in fewer than 150 it-
erations, demonstrating the potential efficacy of simu-
lating quantum phenomena accurately. Conversely, the
noisy simulator, incorporating the full spectrum of hard-
ware noise reproduced for the same hardware, struggled
to maintain a consistent energy minimization pattern.
This challenge primarily stems from the absence of er-
ror mitigation techniques, which are crucial in counter-
acting the inherent noise present on quantum hardware.
Furthermore, Fig.
6 also highlights the impact of er-
ror mitigation in quantum computing simulations, where
the hardware execution exhibits a marked convergence,
characterized by a significant energy reduction within the
first 100 iterations followed by a more gradual decline.
This underscores the importance of error mitigation in
enhancing the accuracy and reliability of quantum simu-
lations.
To evaluate the effectiveness of different VQE setups,
we conducted simulations using various ansatz types, as
shown in Fig. 8. The outcomes demonstrated that both
the generalized UCCS and generalized UCCSD ansatze
converged to the exact value, with UCCS achieving con-
vergence in fewer iterations (under 50), whereas UCCSD
required between 100 to 150 iterations. The latter in-
volves second-order excitations, necessitating a larger
pool of ansatz operators and longer circuits, which intro-
duce more noise. However, it captures a broader range
of the underlying physical processes. Under conditions of
moderate noise, UCCSD is likely to yield superior results.
Operators count for the Generalised UCCSD ansatz with
Config −A can be found in Table III.
Table II presents the spin-spin correlation of impuri-
ties measured via VQE simulations, indicating the most
accurate results were obtained with the Spin Conserved
UCCSD ansatz, which adheres closely to the physical
characteristics of the system.
In Fig.
8, the simula-
tions for the ground state energy using Spin Conserved
UCCSD and EfficientSU2 HEA ansatze both converge
to a barren plateau level [94], despite the former closely
mirroring true-value impurity correlations.
These re-
sults underscore the enhancements in system represen-
tation when restricting to physically justifiable excita-
tions, though they also highlight potential limitations
due to the limited selection of operators in the pool.
Future investigations might explore the spin-conserved
UCC with third-order excitations to potentially overcome
these challenges.
In order to probe the stability of the simulation, we
applied T1/T2 thermal relaxation noise to different sets
of qubits and observed the effect on the ground state en-
ergy, reference Fig. 9, and further investigated the effect
of depolarisation error applied to the whole system, Fig
11. Due to the lack of error mitigation, the addition of
noise proves to be critical for the simulations. Notably,
introducing noise to the qubits representing impurity 1
or impurity 2, as expected from their correlation, yielded
similar effects on the ground state energy (refer to Fig.
9). Conversely, simulations involving noise at the bath
site exhibited a less stable trajectory. These findings un-
derscore the critical role of inter-impurity correlations in
the simulation;
Furthermore, investigating the effect of depolarising er-
ror on the system, Fig.
11 and Fig.
12, highlighted a
strong quadratic dependence of the ground state energy
deviation versus the depolarising error rate. A slope of
approximately 2.01 in a log-log plot of ground-state en-
ergy deviation versus depolarising error rate suggests a
specific power-law relationship between the two variables.
This means that the ground-state energy deviation varies
as the square of the depolarising error rate, defined math-
ematically as:
log(Energy Deviation) ∝2.01 · log(Depolarising Error)
(25)
Energy Deviation ∝(Depolarising Error)2.01
(26)
A slope of approximately 2 highlights a high sensitivity
of the quantum simulation or computation to depolaris-
ing errors. Small increases in error rate cause significant
deviations in the calculated ground-state energy, which
can severely impact the accuracy and reliability of the
measurements.
The quadratic relationship emphasizes
the compounding effect of errors in quantum systems.
This is particularly critical in quantum computations,
where maintaining coherence and precision is essential
for obtaining correct results. Knowing that the relation-
ship is quadratic allows for more precise modeling and
predictions regarding the behavior of a quantum system
under noise. This can aid in the design and scaling of
quantum algorithms by setting thresholds for acceptable
error rates to achieve desired accuracies. Additionally,
we present Fig.
12, which illustrates the variations in
ground state energy and spin-spin correlation deviations
across different levels of depolarization noise. The per-
centage error in energy relative to the spin-spin corre-
lation highlights the significant sensitivity of correlation
measurements to noise.
For instance, 5% error of the
noisy to noiseless simulation result for the ground state
energy is equivalent to up to 80% error in the correla-
tion estimate. This is an important point to note when
considering characterisation of materials properties with
quantum hardware.
To evaluate the VQE method, one effective approach
is to vary the mappings of the impurity and bath sites
onto the qubits. Given the known spin-spin correlations
between impurities, it is expected that positioning their
corresponding qubits further apart would lead to less
accurate results.
Fig.
14 illustrates the three differ-
ent configuration setups used in the experiments, with
12
Config −C having the impurities’ qubits at the great-
est distance from each other. The results, presented in
Fig. 15, confirm this hypothesis: the Config −C simu-
lation converges more slowly to a higher estimate of the
ground state energy, primarily due to noise effects asso-
ciated with entangling more distantly located qubits.
Each experiment was conducted using the same cou-
pling map to maintain consistent connectivity between
qubits, as dictated by the hardware used in the simula-
tions. Over the years, the connectivity of qubits in super-
conducting quantum hardware has evolved but remains
limited, highlighting the significance of qubit mapping in
quantum simulations. Our findings emphasize that the
physical layout of the hardware is crucial and should not
be overlooked, as it significantly affects the quality of the
simulations.
Unlike classical computing environments,
the layout in quantum computing setups is not yet suffi-
ciently abstracted to ensure that results are independent
of qubit ordering. For an in-depth examination of ad-
vancements in qubit connectivity within quantum com-
puting hardware, comprehensive analyses are available
through recent scholarly reviews [99, 100] and industry
developments, particularly from leading entities like IBM
[101] and Google [102]. These sources collectively point
at the progressive enhancements in qubit design and de-
ployment, significantly influencing the field’s evolution.
In this study, we introduce the first application of a
VQE simulation on an AIM model for a highly corre-
lated electron system (Hc) utilizing both quantum hard-
ware and simulators. Adjusting the parameters within
the VQE setup facilitated not only the validation of the
simulation but also the optimization of the configuration
to achieve the best results. The incorporation of noise
models, as depicted in Fig. 9 and Fig. 11, along with the
strategic alteration of qubit mappings for the impurities’
sites, as shown in Fig.
15, confirmed the alignment be-
tween the anticipated trends and the actual convergence
to the ground state energy. While the VQE method on
contemporary quantum machines is challenged by noise
effects, it still showcases a significant capability to sur-
pass traditional quantum chemistry models on classical
devices. This advantage is increasingly amplified through
advancements in error mitigation strategies and the on-
going reduction of hardware noise.
The Hamiltonians
utilized in this study are openly accessible to the com-
munity for benchmarking and evaluating enhancements
in hardware efficiency.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data supporting the findings of this study are
available from the corresponding authors upon reason-
able request.
CODE AVAILABILITY
The code developed throughout this investigation is
available at GitHub Repository.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION
The calculations have been carried out by E.C., T.T.
and C.W.. All of the authors wrote this paper. This in-
vestigation was outlined by C.W.. The published version
of the paper has been read and reviewed by all authors.
FUNDING
E.C. and T.T. are self-funded students. Y.W. is grate-
ful for funding from the China Scholarship Council.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
Supplementary information here.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are thankful for valuable discussions with
Professor Joe Bhaseen and Maria Reboredo Prado. The
research was conducted on free resources supplied by
IBM Quantum platform [40] and Quantinuum [74]. This
research was lead by Dr Cedric Weber.
[1] P. Benioff, Journal of Statistical Physics 22, 563 (1980).
[2] R. P. Feynman, in Feynman and computation (cRc
Press, 2018) pp. 133–153.
[3] Z. Cai, R. Babbush, S. C. Benjamin, S. Endo, W. J.
Huggins, Y. Li, J. R. McClean, and T. E. O’Brien,
Quantum error mitigation (2023), arXiv:2210.00921
[quant-ph].
[4] D. Qin, Y. Chen, and Y. Li, npj Quantum Information
9, 35 (2023).
[5] Z. Cai, R. Babbush, S. Benjamin, S. Endo, W. Huggins,
Y. Li, J. Mcclean, and T. OBrien, Reviews of Modern
Physics 95 (2023).
[6] I. Georgescu, Nature Reviews Physics 2, 519 (2020).
[7] R. Acharya and I. e. a. Aleiner, Nature 614, 676 (2023).
[8] Y. Kim, A. Eddins, S. Anand, K. X. Wei, E. van den
Berg, S. Rosenblatt, H. Nayfeh, Y. Wu, M. Zaletel,
K. Temme, and A. Kandala, Nature 618, 500 (2023).
[9] K. Bharti, A. Cervera-Lierta, T. H. Kyaw, T. Haug,
S. Alperin-Lea, A. Anand, M. Degroote, H. Heimonen,
13
J. S. Kottmann, T. Menke, W.-K. Mok, S. Sim, L.-
C. Kwek, and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Rev. Mod. Phys. 94,
015004 (2022).
[10] J. Preskill, Quantum 2, 79 (2018).
[11] F. T. Chong, D. Franklin, and M. Martonosi, Nature
549, 180 (2017).
[12] L. S. Madsen, F. Laudenbach, M. F. Askarani, F. Ror-
tais, T. Vincent, J. F. F. Bulmer, F. M. Miatto,
L. Neuhaus, L. G. Helt, M. J. Collins, A. E. Lita, T. Ger-
rits, S. W. Nam, V. D. Vaidya, M. Menotti, I. Dhand,
Z. Vernon, N. Quesada, and J. Lavoie, Nature 606, 75
(2022).
[13] P. W. Shor, SIAM Review 41, 303 (1999).
[14] W. A. Borders, A. Z. Pervaiz, S. Fukami, K. Y. Camsari,
H. Ohno, and S. Datta, Nature 573, 390 (2019).
[15] D. Herman, C. Googin, X. Liu, Y. Sun, A. Galda,
I. Safro, M. Pistoia, and Y. Alexeev, Nature Reviews
Physics 5, 450 (2023).
[16] A. M. Aboussalah, C. Chi, and C.-G. Lee, Scientific Re-
ports 13, 3990 (2023).
[17] R. Or´us, S. Mugel, and E. Lizaso, Reviews in Physics
4, 100028 (2019).
[18] R. P. Feynman, International Journal of Theoretical
Physics 21, 467 (1982).
[19] A. J. McCaskey, Z. P. Parks, J. Jakowski, S. V. Moore,
T. D. Morris, T. S. Humble, and R. C. Pooser, npj
Quantum Information 5, 99 (2019).
[20] H. Shang, Y. Fan, L. Shen, C. Guo, J. Liu, X. Duan,
F. Li, and Z. Li, npj Quantum Information 9, 33 (2023).
[21] H. Ma, M. Govoni, and G. Galli, npj Computational
Materials 6, 85 (2020).
[22] M. D. Sapova and A. K. Fedorov, Communications
Physics 5, 199 (2022).
[23] S. McArdle, S. Endo, A. Aspuru-Guzik, S. C. Benjamin,
and X. Yuan, Rev. Mod. Phys. 92, 015003 (2020).
[24] B. P. Lanyon, J. D. Whitfield, G. G. Gillett, M. E.
Goggin, M. P. Almeida, I. Kassal, J. D. Biamonte,
M. Mohseni, B. J. Powell, M. Barbieri, A. Aspuru-
Guzik, and A. G. White, Nature Chemistry 2, 106
(2010).
[25] H. Lim, D. H. Kang, J. Kim, A. Pellow-Jarman, S. Mc-
Farthing, R. Pellow-Jarman, H.-N. Jeon, B. Oh, J.-
K. K. Rhee, and K. T. No, Scientific Reports 14, 2422
(2024).
[26] S.
Barnes
and
S.
Maekawa,
Journal
of
Physics-
condensed Matter - J PHYS-CONDENS MATTER 14
(2002).
[27] Y. Nam, J.-S. Chen, N. Pisenti, K. Wright, C. Delaney,
D. Maslov, K. Brown, S. Allen, J. Amini, J. Apisdorf,
et al., npj Quantum Information 6, 33 (2020).
[28] S.
Barnes
and
S.
Maekawa,
Journal
of
Physics-
condensed Matter - J PHYS-CONDENS MATTER 14
(2002).
[29] M. A. Jones, H. J. Vallury, C. D. Hill, and L. C. L.
Hollenberg, Scientific Reports 12, 8985 (2022).
[30] H.-Y. Huang, R. Kueng, and J. Preskill, Nature Physics
16, 1050 (2020).
[31] W. Dam, H. Liu, G. H. Low, A. Paetznick, A. Paz,
M. Silva, A. Sundaram, K. Svore, and M. Troyer, arXiv
(2024).
[32] Y. Zhang, L. Cincio, C. F. A. Negre, P. Czarnik, P. J.
Coles, P. M. Anisimov, S. M. Mniszewski, S. Tretiak,
and P. A. Dub, npj Quantum Information 8, 96 (2022).
[33] Y. S. Yordanov, V. Armaos, C. H. W. Barnes, and
D. R. M. Arvidsson-Shukur, Communications Physics
4, 228 (2021).
[34] H. R. Grimsley, S. E. Economou, E. Barnes, and N. J.
Mayhall, Nature Communications 10, 3007 (2019).
[35] A. Aspuru-Guzik, A. D. Dutoi, P. J. Love, and M. Head-
Gordon,
Science
309,
1704
(2005),
arXiv:quant-
ph/0604193 [quant-ph].
[36] A. W. Services, VQE Transverse Ising Model (2022).
[37] E. K. U. Gross, L. N. Oliveira, and W. Kohn, Phys.
Rev. A 37, 2805 (1988).
[38] J.
BONAVENTURA
and
C.
BONAVEN-
TURA,
American
Zoologist
20,
7
(2015),
https://academic.oup.com/icb/article-
pdf/20/1/7/5863399/20-1-7.pdf.
[39] S. K. Kehrein and A. Mielke, Annals of Physics 252, 1
(1995).
[40] IBM
Quantum
Lab,
IBM
Quantum,
https:
//quantum-computing.ibm.com/.
[41] S. Kato, T. Matsui, C. Gatsogiannis, and Y. Tanaka,
Biophysical reviews 10, 191202 (2018).
[42] J. J. M. Rom´an, M. D. Campo, J. Villar, F. Paolini,
G. Curzio, A. Venuti, L. Jara, J. Ferreira, P. Murgas,
A. Lladser, A. Manubens, and M. I. Becker, Journal
of Immunological Research 2019, Article ID 7076942
(2019), published online 2019 Jan 20.
[43] S. Arancibia, F. Salazar, and M. I. Becker, in Bladder
Cancer From Basic To Robotic Surgery, edited by A. E.
Canda (InTech, Rijeka, Croatia, 2012) Chap. 4, pp. 221–
242.
[44] D. W. McFadden, D. R. Riggs, B. J. Jackson, and
L. Vona-Davis, American Journal of Surgery 186, 552
(2003), [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar].
[45] D. R. Riggs, B. J. Jackson, L. Vona-Davis, A. Nigam,
and D. W. McFadden, The American Journal of Surgery
189, 680 (2005), [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar].
[46] P. Somasundar, D. R. Riggs, B. J. Jackson, and D. W.
McFadden, American Journal of Surgery 190, 713
(2005), [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar].
[47] D. R. Riggs, B. J. Jackson, L. Vona-Davis, and D. W.
McFadden, Journal of Surgical Research 108, 279
(2002), [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar].
[48] H. Hafermann, F. Lechermann, A. Rubtsov, M. Katsnel-
son, A. Georges, and A. Lichtenstein, Lecture Notes in
Physics 843, 145 (2012).
[49] N. Lin, C. A. Marianetti, A. J. Millis, and D. R. Reich-
man, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 096402 (2011).
[50] D. Jacob, K. Haule, and G. Kotliar, Phys. Rev. B 82,
195115 (2010).
[51] I.
Rungger,
N.
Fitzpatrick,
H.
Chen,
C. Huerta Alderete, H. Apel, A. Cowtan, A. Pat-
terson,
D. Ramo,
Y. Zhu,
N. Nguyen,
. Grant,
S. Chretien, L. Wossnig, N. Linke, and R. Duncan,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04735 (2019).
[52] V. Singh, U. Herath, B. Wah, X. Liao, A. H. Romero,
and H. Park, Computer Physics Communications 261,
107778 (2021).
[53] V. E. Elfving, B. W. Broer, M. Webber, J. L. Gavartin,
M. D. Halls, K. P. Lorton, and A. D. Bochevarov, arXiv:
Quantum Physics (2020).
[54] K.
Sheshadri,
D.
Malterre,
A.
Fujimori,
and
A. Chainani, Phys. Rev. B 107, 085125 (2023).
[55] N. Marzari, D. Vanderbilt, and M. C. Payne, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 79, 1337 (1997).
14
[56] C. Weber, D. D. O’Regan, N. D. M. Hine, P. B. Little-
wood, G. Kotliar, and M. C. Payne, Phys. Rev. Lett.
110, 106402 (2013).
[57] A. Peruzzo, J. McClean, P. Shadbolt, M. H. Yung, X. Q.
Zhou, P. J. Love, A. Aspuru-Guzik, and J. L. OBrien,
Nature Communications 5, 1 (2014).
[58] Y. Shen, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, J.-N. Zhang, M.-H. Yung,
and K. Kim, Phys. Rev. A 95, 020501 (2017).
[59] P. J. O’Malley et al., Physical Review X 6, 1 (2016).
[60] R. Santagati, J. Wang, A. A. Gentile, S. Paesani,
N. Wiebe, J. R. McClean, S. Morley-Short, P. J.
Shadbolt, D. Bonneau, J. W. Silverstone, D. P. Tew,
X. Zhou, J. L. O’Brien, and M. G. Thompson, Science
Advances 4, 10.1126/sciadv.aap9646 (2018).
[61] A. Kandala, A. Mezzacapo, K. Temme, M. Takita,
M. Brink, J. M. Chow, and J. M. Gambetta, Nature
549, 242 (2017).
[62] J. I. Colless, V. V. Ramasesh, D. Dahlen, M. S. Blok,
M. E. Kimchi-Schwartz, J. R. McClean, J. Carter, W. A.
de Jong, and I. Siddiqi, Physical Review X 8, 011021
(2018).
[63] C. Hempel, C. Maier, J. Romero, J. McClean, T. Monz,
H. Shen, P. Jurcevic, B. P. Lanyon, P. Love, R. Bab-
bush, A. Aspuru-Guzik, R. Blatt, and C. F. Roos, Phys.
Rev. X 8, 031022 (2018).
[64] A. Kandala, K. Temme, A. D. C´orcoles, A. Mezzacapo,
J. M. Chow, and J. M. Gambetta, Nature 567, 491
(2019).
[65] F. Arute et al., Science 369, 1084 (2020).
[66] Z. Li, X. Liu, H. Wang, S. Ashhab, J. Cui, H. Chen,
X. Peng, and J. Du, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 090504
(2019).
[67] Y. Nam et al., npj Quantum Information 6, 33 (2020).
[68] A. J. McCaskey, Z. P. Parks, J. Jakowski, S. V. Moore,
T. D. Morris, T. S. Humble, and R. C. Pooser, npj
Quantum Information 5, 99 (2019).
[69] Q. Gao, H. Nakamura, T. P. Gujarati, G. O. Jones,
J. E. Rice, S. P. Wood, M. Pistoia, J. M. Garcia, and
N. Yamamoto, The Journal of Physical Chemistry A
125, 1827 (2021).
[70] S. E. Smart and D. A. Mazziotti, Phys. Rev. A 100,
022517 (2019).
[71] Q. Gao, G. O. Jones, M. Motta, M. Sugawara, H. C.
Watanabe, T. Kobayashi, E. Watanabe, Y. ya Ohnishi,
H. Nakamura, and N. Yamamoto, npj Computational
Materials 7, 70 (2021).
[72] C. Cao, J. Hu, W. Zhang, X. Xu, D. Chen, F. Yu, J. Li,
H.-S. Hu, D. Lv, and M.-H. Yung, Phys. Rev. A 105,
062452 (2022).
[73] S. N. Genin et al., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 61,
https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.202116175
(2022),
e202116175.
[74] Quantinuum, https://www.quantinuum.com/ (2024),
accessed: DATE.
[75] M. A. al Badri, E. Linscott, A. Georges, D. J. Cole, and
C. Weber, Communications Physics 3, 4 (2020).
[76] H. Park, K. Haule, and G. Kotliar, Phys. Rev. Lett.
101, 186403 (2008).
[77] N. Marzari, A. A. Mostofi, J. R. Yates, I. Souza, and
D. Vanderbilt, Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 1419 (2012).
[78] D. Rappoport, N. R. M. Crawford, F. Furche, and
K. Burke (2009).
[79] S. Bi, L. Huang, and N.-H. Tong, Computer Physics
Communications 235, 196 (2019).
[80] S.
Barnes
and
S.
Maekawa,
Journal
of
Physics-
condensed Matter - J PHYS-CONDENS MATTER 14
(2002).
[81] Google’s open source code library, OpenFermion com-
munity, OpenFermion, Open-Source Quantum Develop-
ment, https://github.com/quantumlib/OpenFermion.
[82] IBM Research, Qiskit community, Qiskit Textbook
(beta), https://qiskit.org/learn/.
[83] J. Romero, R. Babbush, J. R. McClean, C. Hempel,
P. J. Love, and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Quantum Science and
Technology 4, 014008 (2018).
[84] G.
Harsha,
T.
Shiozaki,
and
G.
E.
Scuseria,
The
Journal
of
Chemical
Physics
148,
044107
(2018),
https://pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp/article-
pdf/doi/10.1063/1.5011033/15537601/044107 1 online.pdf.
[85] A. Kandala, A. Mezzacapo, K. Temme, M. Takita,
M. Brink, J. M. Chow, and J. M. Gambetta, Nature
549, 242 (2017).
[86] M. Ganzhorn, D. Egger, P. Barkoutsos, P. Ollitrault,
G. Salis, N. Moll, M. Roth, A. Fuhrer, P. Mueller,
S. Woerner, I. Tavernelli, and S. Filipp, Phys. Rev.
Appl. 11, 044092 (2019).
[87] A. Kandala, K. Temme, A. D. C´orcoles, A. Mezzacapo,
J. M. Chow, and J. M. Gambetta, Nature 567, 491
(2019).
[88] B. T. Gard, L. Zhu, G. S. Barron, N. J. Mayhall, S. E.
Economou, and E. Barnes, npj Quantum Information
6, 10 (2020).
[89] P. K. Barkoutsos, J. F. Gonthier, I. Sokolov, N. Moll,
G. Salis,
A. Fuhrer,
M. Ganzhorn,
D. J. Egger,
M. Troyer, A. Mezzacapo, S. Filipp, and I. Tavernelli,
Phys. Rev. A 98, 022322 (2018).
[90] P.-L. Dallaire-Demers, J. Romero, L. Veis, S. Sim, and
A. Aspuru-Guzik, Quantum Science and Technology 4,
045005 (2019).
[91] C. Hempel, C. Maier, J. Romero, J. McClean, T. Monz,
H. Shen, P. Jurcevic, B. P. Lanyon, P. Love, R. Bab-
bush, A. Aspuru-Guzik, R. Blatt, and C. F. Roos, Phys.
Rev. X 8, 031022 (2018).
[92] S.
Gocho,
H.
Nakamura,
S.
Kanno,
Q.
Gao,
T. Kobayashi, T. Inagaki, and M. Hatanaka, npj Com-
putational Materials 9, 13 (2023).
[93] K. M. Nakanishi, K. Mitarai, and K. Fujii, Physical Re-
view Research 2, 043158 (2020).
[94] S. Wang, E. Fontana, M. Cerezo, K. Sharma, A. Sone,
L. Cincio, and P. J. Coles, Nature Communications 12,
6961 (2021).
[95] Microsoft,
Microsoft
azure
quantum
(2023),
re-
trieved
from
https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/
services/quantum/.
[96] J. Spall, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 37,
332 (1992).
[97] Qiskit, Qiskit aer: High performance simulator frame-
work for quantum circuits (2021), accessed: 2021-09-01.
[98] K.
Sheshadri,
D.
Malterre,
A.
Fujimori,
and
A. Chainani, Physical Review B 107, 085125 (2023).
[99] J. Preskill, Quantum 2, 79 (2018).
[100] F. Arute et al., Nature 574, 505 (2019).
[101] I. Q. Team, The evolution of ibm quantum systems
(2021), accessed: 2021-09-10.
[102] G. Q. A. Team, Google quantum ai (2021), accessed:
2021-09-10.
1
I.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
Presented below are the constructed Hamiltonians used in the VQE solver in its transformed Pauli string form,
corresponding to the number of qubits and value of U.
6 Qubit
( −0.4640485702054111+0 j )
[ ] +
( −0.0332912087832737+0 j )
[X0 Z1 Z2 Z3 X4] +
( −0.0332912087832737+0 j )
[Y0 Z1 Z2 Z3 Y4] +
(0.06874150000000001+0 j )
[ Z0 ] +
(0.07335+0 j )
[ Z0 Z1 ] +
( −0.0332912087832737+0 j )
[X1 Z2 Z3 Z4 X5] +
( −0.0332912087832737+0 j )
[Y1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Y5] +
(0.06874150000000001+0 j )
[ Z1 ] +
(0.0245514029353716+0 j )
[X2 Z3 X4] +
(0.0245514029353716+0 j )
[Y2 Z3 Y4] +
(0.058285350000000014+0 j )
[ Z2 ] +
(0.07335+0 j )
[ Z2 Z3 ] +
(0.0245514029353716+0 j )
[X3 Z4 X5] +
(0.0245514029353716+0 j )
[Y3 Z4 Y5] +
(0.058285350000000014+0 j )
[ Z3 ] +
(0.0316474351027055+0 j )
[ Z4 ] +
(0.0316474351027055+0 j )
[ Z5 ]
8 Qubit
( −0.41926934879169153+0 j )
[ ] +
(0.0169273012830259+0 j )
[X0 Z1 Z2 Z3 X4] +
( −0.0124834455965616+0 j )
[X0 Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 X6] +
(0.0169273012830259+0 j )
[Y0 Z1 Z2 Z3 Y4] +
( −0.0124834455965616+0 j )
[Y0 Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Y6] +
(0.06874150000000001+0 j )
[ Z0 ] +
(0.07335+0 j )
[ Z0 Z1 ] +
(0.0169273012830259+0 j )
[X1 Z2 Z3 Z4 X5] +
( −0.0124834455965616+0 j )
[X1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 X7] +
(0.0169273012830259+0 j )
[Y1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Y5] +
( −0.0124834455965616+0 j )
[Y1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Y7] +
(0.06874150000000001+0 j )
[ Z1 ] +
( −0.0286665490477019+0 j )
[X2 Z3 X4] +
(0.02114083628193125+0 j )
[X2 Z3 Z4 Z5 X6] +
( −0.0286665490477019+0 j )
[Y2 Z3 Y4] +
(0.02114083628193125+0 j )
[Y2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Y6] +
(0.058285350000000014+0 j )
[ Z2 ] +
(0.07335+0 j )
[ Z2 Z3 ] +
( −0.0286665490477019+0 j )
[X3 Z4 X5] +
(0.02114083628193125+0 j )
[X3 Z4 Z5 Z6 X7] +
( −0.0286665490477019+0 j )
[Y3 Z4 Y5] +
(0.02114083628193125+0 j )
[Y3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Y7] +
(0.058285350000000014+0 j )
[ Z3 ] +
(0.0236589565634185+0 j )
[X4 Z5 X6] +
(0.0236589565634185+0 j )
[Y4 Z5 Y6] +
( −0.00841924169912505+0 j )
[ Z4 ] +
(0.0236589565634185+0 j )
[X5 Z6 X7] +
(0.0236589565634185+0 j )
[Y5 Z6 Y7] +
( −0.00841924169912505+0 j )
[ Z5 ] +
(0.0176770660949708+0 j )
[ Z6 ] +
(0.0176770660949708+0 j )
[ Z7 ]
14 Qubit
arXiv:2410.12733v2  [quant-ph]  21 Nov 2024
2
( −0.9203822755004079+0 j )
[ ] +
( −0.0102330968552639+0 j )
[X0 Z1 Z2 Z3 X4] +
( −0.0058645309558+0 j )
[X0 Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 X6] +
( −0.0232723792309368+0 j )
[X0 Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 X8] +
(0.0285112773771463+0 j )
[X0 Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 X10 ] +
(0.03368107911672325+0 j )
[X0 Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Z11 X12 ] +
( −0.0102330968552639+0 j )
[Y0 Z1 Z2 Z3 Y4] +
( −0.0058645309558+0 j )
[Y0 Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Y6] +
( −0.0232723792309368+0 j )
[Y0 Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Y8] +
(0.0285112773771463+0 j )
[Y0 Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Y10 ] +
(0.03368107911672325+0 j )
[Y0 Z1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Z11 Y12 ] +
(0.06874150000000001+0 j )
[ Z0 ] +
(0.07335+0 j )
[ Z0 Z1 ] +
( −0.0102330968552639+0 j )
[X1 Z2 Z3 Z4 X5] +
( −0.0058645309558+0 j )
[X1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 X7] +
( −0.0232723792309368+0 j )
[X1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 X9] +
(0.0285112773771463+0 j )
[X1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 X11 ] +
(0.03368107911672325+0 j )
[X1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Z11 Z12 X13 ] +
( −0.0102330968552639+0 j )
[Y1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Y5] +
( −0.0058645309558+0 j )
[Y1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Y7] +
( −0.0232723792309368+0 j )
[Y1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Y9] +
(0.0285112773771463+0 j )
[Y1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Y11 ] +
(0.03368107911672325+0 j )
[Y1 Z2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Z11 Z12 Y13 ] +
(0.06874150000000001+0 j )
[ Z1 ] +
( −0.01395767436142885+0 j )
[X2 Z3 X4] +
(0.02042556305865555+0 j )
[X2 Z3 Z4 Z5 X6] +
( −0.0342747841006893+0 j )
[X2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 X8] +
( −0.0194319517229672+0 j )
[X2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 X10 ] +
( −0.0051669611836042+0 j )
[X2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Z11 X12 ] +
( −0.01395767436142885+0 j )
[Y2 Z3 Y4] +
(0.02042556305865555+0 j )
[Y2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Y6] +
( −0.0342747841006893+0 j )
[Y2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Y8] +
( −0.0194319517229672+0 j )
[Y2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Y10 ] +
( −0.0051669611836042+0 j )
[Y2 Z3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Z11 Y12 ] +
(0.058285350000000014+0 j )
[ Z2 ] +
(0.07335+0 j )
[ Z2 Z3 ] +
( −0.01395767436142885+0 j )
[X3 Z4 X5] +
(0.02042556305865555+0 j )
[X3 Z4 Z5 Z6 X7] +
( −0.0342747841006893+0 j )
[X3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 X9] +
( −0.0194319517229672+0 j )
[X3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 X11 ] +
( −0.0051669611836042+0 j )
[X3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Z11 Z12 X13 ] +
( −0.01395767436142885+0 j )
[Y3 Z4 Y5] +
(0.02042556305865555+0 j )
[Y3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Y7] +
( −0.0342747841006893+0 j )
[Y3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Y9] +
( −0.0194319517229672+0 j )
[Y3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Y11 ] +
( −0.0051669611836042+0 j )
[Y3 Z4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Z11 Z12 Y13 ] +
(0.058285350000000014+0 j )
[ Z3 ] +
(0.00800357635717085+0 j )
[X4 Z5 X6] +
( −0.04725338824796345+0 j )
[X4 Z5 Z6 Z7 X8] +
(0.00696745171857815+0 j )
[X4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 X10 ] +
(0.0036965854307191+0 j )
[X4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Z11 X12 ] +
(0.00800357635717085+0 j )
[Y4 Z5 Y6] +
( −0.04725338824796345+0 j )
[Y4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Y8] +
(0.00696745171857815+0 j )
[Y4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Y10 ] +
(0.0036965854307191+0 j )
[Y4 Z5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Z11 Y12 ] +
(0.05178138173911655+0 j )
[ Z4 ] +
(0.00800357635717085+0 j )
[X5 Z6 X7] +
( −0.04725338824796345+0 j )
[X5 Z6 Z7 Z8 X9] +
3
(0.00696745171857815+0 j )
[X5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 X11 ] +
(0.0036965854307191+0 j )
[X5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Z11 Z12 X13 ] +
(0.00800357635717085+0 j )
[Y5 Z6 Y7] +
( −0.04725338824796345+0 j )
[Y5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Y9] +
(0.00696745171857815+0 j )
[Y5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Y11 ] +
(0.0036965854307191+0 j )
[Y5 Z6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Z11 Z12 Y13 ] +
(0.05178138173911655+0 j )
[ Z5 ] +
(0.0043850975092616+0 j )
[X6 Z7 X8] +
( −0.01487110793047115+0 j )
[X6 Z7 Z8 Z9 X10 ] +
( −0.02364586870809315+0 j )
[X6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Z11 X12 ] +
(0.0043850975092616+0 j )
[Y6 Z7 Y8] +
( −0.01487110793047115+0 j )
[Y6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Y10 ] +
( −0.02364586870809315+0 j )
[Y6 Z7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Z11 Y12 ] +
(0.03514668312536425+0 j )
[ Z6 ] +
(0.0043850975092616+0 j )
[X7 Z8 X9] +
( −0.01487110793047115+0 j )
[X7 Z8 Z9 Z10 X11 ] +
( −0.02364586870809315+0 j )
[X7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Z11 Z12 X13 ] +
(0.0043850975092616+0 j )
[Y7 Z8 Y9] +
( −0.01487110793047115+0 j )
[Y7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Y11 ] +
( −0.02364586870809315+0 j )
[Y7 Z8 Z9 Z10 Z11 Z12 Y13 ] +
(0.03514668312536425+0 j )
[ Z7 ] +
( −0.01037904738535395+0 j )
[X8 Z9 X10 ] +
(0.00386000942055545+0 j )
[X8 Z9 Z10 Z11 X12 ] +
( −0.01037904738535395+0 j )
[Y8 Z9 Y10 ] +
(0.00386000942055545+0 j )
[Y8 Z9 Z10 Z11 Y12 ] +
(0.07645310066235694+0 j )
[ Z8 ] +
( −0.01037904738535395+0 j )
[X9 Z10 X11 ] +
(0.00386000942055545+0 j )
[X9 Z10 Z11 Z12 X13 ] +
( −0.01037904738535395+0 j )
[Y9 Z10 Y11 ] +
(0.00386000942055545+0 j )
[Y9 Z10 Z11 Z12 Y13 ] +
(0.07645310066235694+0 j )
[ Z9 ] +
( −0.0472194011845761+0 j )
[ X10 Z11 X12 ] +
( −0.0472194011845761+0 j )
[ Y10 Z11 Y12 ] +
(0.0472879363412088+0 j )
[ Z10 ] +
( −0.0472194011845761+0 j )
[ X11 Z12 X13 ] +
( −0.0472194011845761+0 j )
[ Y11 Z12 Y13 ] +
(0.0472879363412088+0 j )
[ Z11 ] +
(0.0491451858821573+0 j )
[ Z12 ] +
(0.0491451858821573+0 j )
[ Z13 ]
4
FIG. 1. Comparison of ground-state energy estimates from various 6-qubit VQE simulation setups utilizing the Generalised
UCCSD ansatz, Hamiltonian Config −A, and specific VQE parameters. The simulations were subjected to T1/T2 thermal
relaxation noise of half the level presented in the paper and also selectively applied to three different sets of qubits: Impurity
1 (qubits 0 and 1), Impurity 2 (qubits 2 and 3), and the Bath (qubits 4 and 5). Consistent with expectations due to the
correlation between Impurity 1 and Impurity 2 sites, noise impacting either set results in similar values for the ground state
energy. Conversely, noise affecting the Bath sites demonstrates more significant detrimental effects on the system’s performance.
5
FIG. 2. Comparison of ground-state energy estimates from various 6-qubit VQE simulation setups utilizing the Generalised
UCCSD ansatz, Hamiltonian Config −A, and specific VQE parameters. The simulations were subjected to T1/T2 thermal
relaxation noise, selectively applied to three different sets of qubits: Impurity 1 (qubits 0 and 1), Impurity 2 (qubits 2 and
3), and the Bath (qubits 4 and 5). Consistent with expectations due to the correlation between Impurity 1 and Impurity 2
sites, noise impacting either set results in similar values for the ground state energy. Conversely, noise affecting the Bath sites
demonstrates more significant detrimental effects on the system’s performance.
