Critical transitions in pancreatic islets
D. Koroˇsak
,1, 2, ∗S. Posti´c,3 A. Stoˇzer,1 B. Podobnik,4 and M. Slak Rupnik
3, 1, 5, †
1University of Maribor, Faculty of Medicine, Institute for Physiology, Maribor, Slovenia
2University of Maribor, Faculty of Civil Engineering,
Transportation Engineering and Architecture, Maribor, Slovenia
3Medical University of Vienna, Center for physiology and pharmacology, Vienna, Austria
4University of Rijeka, Faculty of Civil Engineering, Rijeka, Croatia
5Alma Mater Europaea University - European Center Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia
(Dated: October 24, 2024)
Calcium signals in pancreatic β cells collectives show a sharp transition from uncorrelated to
correlated state resembling a phase transition as the slowly increasing glucose concentration crosses
the tipping point.
However, the exact nature or the order of this phase transition is not well
understood. Using confocal microscopy to record the collective calcium activation of β cells in an
intact islet under changing glucose concentration in increasing and then decreasing way, we first
show that in addition to the sharp transition, the coordinated calcium response exhibits a hysteresis
indicating a critical, first order transition.
A network model of β cells combining link selection
and coordination mechanisms capture the observed hysteresis loop and the critical nature of the
transition. Our results point towards the understanding the role of islets as tipping elements in the
pancreas that interconnected by perfusion, diffusion and innervation cause the tipping dynamics
and abrupt insulin release.
The bio-sociological organization of β cells in pancre-
atic islets [1] plays a vital role in managing insulin release
to ensure optimal nutrient distribution and metabolic
balance in the body. Secretion of insulin from pancreas
is biphasic [2, 3] with an immediate, sharp initial peak
followed by a slower second phase. The fast first phase
indicates that the response to stimulus from islets is es-
sentially simultaneous with a precise and coherent β cells
activation. The calcium activity of β cells at the level of
individual islets, a key signal [4] in insulin secretion path-
way, remains low and stochastic at lower glucose concen-
trations approximately around 6 mM. Once the gradually
increasing glucose level hits the tipping point (around 7
mM), an abrupt shift in the correlation patterns and syn-
chronicity of calcium activity among localized functional
groups of β cells is experimentally observed [5–7]. Such
sudden change in a macroscopic state of islets [8] from
an incoherent into a synchronous functional state has
considerable implications for insulin secretion and overall
metabolic regulation, and is an example of a phase (crit-
ical) transition in a system of cells that interact mostly
locally.
The phase transition in β cells activity is a complex
phenomenon that involves the interplay between glucose
metabolism, electrical activity, and intracellular Ca2+
dynamics. The transition is also influenced by the spa-
tial organization of β cells within the islet, the hetero-
geneity of β cells responses to glucose, and the strength
of intercellular coupling. The efforts to understand the
occurence of phase transitions in β cells activity have
been made using a variety of experimental and theoreti-
cal approaches, often employing network representations
of β cells interactions. In one such study [9], the authors
showed that a sharp transition between active and inac-
tive states in pancreatic islets occurs when the proportion
of quiescent β cells exceeds some critical threshold. Using
a dynamical model, the study suggests that the critical
behavior of pancreatic islets follows general properties
of coupled heterogeneous networks. Another study [10]
showed that the onset of islet disfunction can be under-
stood as a phase transition in the pancreatic islet β cells
network. Using percolation theory, the authors demon-
strated that there exists a critical threshold of β cells loss
beyond which the cells fail to synchronize, and that both
site occupancy and bond strength (intercellular coupling)
are critical to ensure a proper islet function.
Less attention was given to the nature of such phase
transitions in β cells activity, i.e., whether the transi-
tion is of the first or the second order, or in other words
whether the order parameter that describes the macro-
scopic state of the system changes continuously or discon-
tinuously when the control parameter crosses the tipping
point [11]. Percolation in random networks where new
links are added randomly is a second order phase transi-
tion with the giant component appearing smoothly at a
critical probability of links in the network. In contrast,
explosive percolation [12, 13] is a sharp second order or
even first order phase transition where the giant compo-
nent appears abruptly at a critical number of links.
In this work, we aim to address this question by delib-
erately crossing the tipping point in β cells activity by
slowly increasing and then slowly decreasing the glucose
concentration in intact pancreatic islet in fresh tissues
slices. We show that the transition in β cells activity ex-
hibits a hysteresis, indicating a critical, first order tran-
sition.
We start by first displaying the data compiled from
published experimental evidence for the sharp transition
arXiv:2410.17756v1  [cond-mat.stat-mech]  23 Oct 2024
2
Figure 1.
Upper panel: Phase transition of β cells
activity. Active phase of β cells as a function of control pa-
rameter p. β cells electrical activity measured in islets in vivo
(open squares), and from micro-dissected islets (pluses) [14]
against scaled glucose concentration as a control parameter.
[Ca2+]c activity as a function of glucose concentration in fresh
tissue slices (own data, open circles), and in β cells with Kir6.2
mutation (downward triangles) [15]. β cells electrical activ-
ity as a function of a scaled Kir6.2 mutation extent as cou-
pling parameter (upward triangles) [9]. Data points shown
here were extracted using WebPlotDigitizer [16] from plots
in original publications.
Lower panel:
Activation and
deactivation delay of β-cells .
Open symbols – model,
full symbols – data [6], circles, squares – activation, trian-
gles, diamonds – deactivation.
Here, ∆is the normalized
difference ∆= (Td −Td,min)/(Td,max −Td,min) in activa-
tion/deactivation delays over the stimulation interval.
in β cells activity as a function of the control parameter
in the upper panel of Figure 1.
Active phase was de-
fined either as plasma membrane electrical activity [14]
or as intracellular Ca2+ oscillations [9, 15] of β cells. The
dimensionless control parameter here is either the nor-
malized glucose concentration [14, 15], or the normalized
number of excitable cells in the population [9].
The observed sharp, first-order-like phase transition
from inactive to active β cells states occurs at a particu-
lar critical value of the control parameter for each dataset
and has practically the same shape for all data when
the control parameter is scaled with its critical value.
For a subgroup of cells, mostly from micro-dissected islet
with impaired intercellular communication, we observe a
smooth, second-order-like phase transition.
The lower panel of Figure 1 shows the activation and
deactivation delays Td of β cells as a function of glucose
concentration [7].
The activation delay is the time it
takes for the Ca2+ activity to reach a certain threshold
after the glucose crosses the tipping point, while the de-
activation delay is the time it takes for the Ca2+ activity
to return to the baseline level after glucose drops below
the tipping point. The activation and deactivation delays
are normalized to the maximum and minimum values of
the deactivation delay over the stimulation interval. The
empirical data [7] was obtained from confocal microscopy
recordings of Ca2+ activity in β cells in intact islets un-
der the stimulation protocol where glucose increases with
1 mM/min from 6 mM to final concentration (8 mM, 12
mM, 14 mM, 16 mM) and decreases at the same rate.
The model for the delays employs exponential increase
and decrease of glucose concentration in the protocol and
assumes constant rates and tipping points for activation
and deactivation set at Gc = 7 mM and Gc = 6.6 mM
(see Figure 2, top panel) independent of glucose.
The combination of these empirical findings, the sharp
transition in β cells activity and difference in the tip-
ping points for activation/deactivation, indicate a criti-
cal, first-order phase transition in β cells activity. To fur-
ther explore the nature of observed phase transition ob-
served in Ca2+ activity data, we devised and performed
a new experiment in which we deliberately first slowly
increased and then slowly decreased the glucose concen-
tration at the rate 1mM/min in intact pancreatic islet
across the β cells stimulation threshold while simulta-
neously recording the Ca2+ activity. The experimental
procedure, data acquisition and data analytics was, apart
from the specifically shallow glucose ramp to capture crit-
ical activity threshold, the same as in our previous exper-
imental work and described in details in [17]. The idea
for this experiment was to capture crossing the tipping
point and the subsequent return to the baseline state in
a single experiment without the prolonged exposure to
stimulating glucose levels.
The top panel of Figure 2 shows measured mean Ca
signal over all recorded β cells signals that shows the ex-
pected sharp transition from inactive to active state of
β cells as the glucose concentration crosses the tipping
point.
The vertical dashed lines (first and third from
left) mark the time points when the glucose concentra-
tion, shown as smooth full line, reaches the tipping point
in the increasing part Gc = 7 mM, and when the glucose
concentration drops below the tipping point on the de-
creasing part at Gc = 6.6 mM. The other vertical dashed
lines (second and fourth from left) mark approximately
3
Figure 2.
Mean calcium signal timeseries and β cells
correlation network properties. Glucose 6-8 increase at
a rate 1 mM/min. top to bottom: mean Ca signal, largest
eigenvalue, clustering and second largest eigenvalue of the cor-
relation network with fixed number of links.
All networks
were constructed with fixed mean degree ⟨k⟩= 10.
the activation and deactivation intervals. We can see that
the activation interval occurs well before the cells are
fully synchronized and that deactivation interval starts
when the cells are desynchronized.
Next, we map the collective response of β cells to stim-
uli onto a correlation network where the links between the
nodes are determined by the activity and synchronization
of cells. The way that functional networks representing
islets are usually constructed from calcium dynamics in β
cells involves two steps. First, correlations cij(t) between
short segments with length T of calcium signals at time t
for all pairs (i, j) of cells are obtained from recorded time
series of calcium activity, and then these correlations are
compared to some chosen threshold value c0. If corre-
lation of a certain cell pair (i, j) exceeds the threshold
value, cij(t) > c0, the link (i, j) is placed in the network
between the nodes representing this cell pair. The choice
of the threshold value in such correlation or functional
graphs is crucial as it determines the network density
and other network properties.
Here, we keep the total number of links L = N⟨k⟩/2,
where ⟨k⟩is the mean degree, fixed [18] and for particu-
lar network realization we select top L links from link list
sorted by correlation coefficient. Here we use ⟨k⟩= 10
throughout this paper. In such correlation network con-
struction we then observe the changes in the linkage ar-
rangment between the nodes as a function of time. These
structural changes are reflected in some global network
properties such as the largest (λ1) and the second largest
(λ2) eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix, the cluster-
ing coefficient (C), assortativity (r), and the eigenra-
tio λN/λ2 between the largest and the second smallest
eigenvalues of the network Laplacian matrix. The time
dependence of these network properties are displayed in
Figures 2 and 3.
As glucose concentration approaches the critical tip-
ping point, a sharp increase is observed in both the
largest eigenvalue, λ1, and the clustering coefficient, C,
indicating a significant reconfiguration of the β cells net-
work. This reconfiguration suggests a structural transi-
tion in the network, despite the number of connections
remaining constant. The increase in λ1 implies that cer-
tain nodes (cells) in the network might be gaining greater
influence measured by their number of links, which is
captured by the bounds set by the Perron-Frobenius the-
orem: ⟨k⟩< λ1 < kmax, where ⟨k⟩is the average de-
gree and kmax is the maximum degree of the network.
More tight bound for λ1 in some random networks is
max (√kmax, ⟨k2⟩/⟨k⟩) [19], while increasing the variance
of interaction strength also leads to increasing of spec-
tral radius or λ1 [20]. The network is not merely random
but is reorganizing into a more coordinated, hierarchical
structure as glucose crosses the tipping point. The ob-
served changes align with the experimental calcium sig-
naling data, where the β cells shift from an uncoordinated
state to a highly synchronized collective response.
Particularly interesting is the behavior of the second
largest eigenvalue λ2 near the tipping points (Figure 2)
where the transient sharp increase is observed.
While
the largest eigenvalue λ1 follows the time evolution of
average correlation and synchronization between β cells,
the changes in the second largest eigenvalue λ2 occur
before the onset of synchronization indicating the struc-
tural changes in the network that precede the collective
response of β cells. This is similar to the λ2 behavior
observed in correlation matrices of stock market evolu-
tion [21] where the spikes in λ2 are associated with the
changes in correlation between particular stocks and all
others. In the context of β cells activity, the observed
changes in λ2 suggest that the network is reorganizing
its structure so that the onset of synchronization starts
with particular cells or small clusters of cells.
The changes in the network structure during the phase
transition are further reflected in the behavior of the as-
sortativity coefficient r and the ratio of the largest to
the second smallest eigenvalue of the network Laplacian,
λN/λ2, as shown in Figure 3. As the glucose concentra-
tion increases and crosses the tipping point, the assor-
tativity coefficient r, which quantifies the preference for
nodes to link with (dis)similar degree nodes, exhibits a
transient increase before the network becomes disassor-
tative r < 0. This suggests a shift towards a network
organizaton where high-degree β cells preferentially con-
nect with low-degree cells.
Simultaneously, the ratio λN/λ2, representing the
spectral gap of the network Laplacian, increases sharply
around the tipping points. A larger spectral gap implies
that the network ability to propagate signals or synchro-
4
Figure 3.
Assortativity and Laplacian eigenvalues ra-
tio. Assortativity coefficient r (top)and ratio of the largest
and the second smallest eigenvalues of the network Lapla-
cian λN/λ2 (bottom) as a function of time. The network is
constructed with fixed number of links and computations are
performed on the largest connected component of the network
at each particular time.
nize its components is enhanced, which is consistent with
the observed transition to a correlated calcium signaling
state. This ratio, therefore, serves as a sensitive indica-
tor of the network structural and dynamic changes during
the phase transition.
In combination with the results presented in Figure
2, where the largest eigenvalue λ1 and clustering co-
efficient C increase dramatically at the tipping point,
these changes highlight a fundamental reorganization of
the network topology. The network transitions from a
more random, uncoordinated configuration to one that
is highly organized and structured. This reorganization
correlates with the abrupt increase in the mean calcium
signal, demonstrating that the underlying network dy-
namics are tightly coupled to the observed biological re-
sponse.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
r = −1/5
r = 1/3
Figure 4. A small graph example. In a small and sim-
ple graph relinking from (6,7) to (2,7), changes the network
structure from assortative to disassortative, from r = 1/3 to
r = −1/5. This link switch also changes the largest eigen-
value of the adjacencny matrix and the maximal degree of
the graph.
In Figure 4, we illustrate how switching a single link
in a simple graph can induce a transition from an as-
sortative to a disassortative network structure. Initially,
with the link between nodes 6 and 7, the assortativity
coefficient r = 1/3 indicates that nodes preferentially
connect to others with similar degrees. However, when
this link is switched from (6,7) to (2,7), the assortativity
changes to r = −1/5, indicating a shift to a disassorta-
Figure 5.
Phase transition and hysteresis. Upper panel:
Largest eigenvalue of correlation matrix (cirles), clustering of
the correlation network (squares) with fixed number of links.
Lower panel: Average spin (magnetization) in microscopic
model with spins and explosive percolation process with N =
103, k = 10, q = 0.1 (squares) and q = 0.6 (circles).
tive structure, where nodes with different degrees become
more likely to connect. This link change also affects other
network properties, such as the largest eigenvalue of the
adjacency matrix and the maximal degree, highlighting
how a seemingly minor alteration can significantly im-
pact the network’s overall topology. This behavior in the
simple graph hint towards a key principle in larger net-
works: small structural changes, such as the rewiring or
relinking of a few critical connections, can induce signifi-
cant transitions in the network’s properties at the critical
point.
In Figure 5 (upper panel) we plotted λ1 and C as a
function of the control parameter (the glucose concen-
tration) through the increasing and decreasing part. The
hysteresis loop that is clearly visible in both λ1 and C as
the glucose concentration crosses the tipping point is a
hallmark of a first-order phase transition, indicating that
the transition from an uncoordinated to a coordinated
5
state of β cells activity is abrupt and irreversible.
To model the observed empirical findings we introduce
a β cell network that combines two processes: (1) the
link selection process that describes initial intracellular
calcium activity occuring in separate, small clusters of
β cells, and (2) the coordination of stochastic discrete
β cells states that describes the synchronization process
accross the entire islet as smaller cell clusters coalesce
into large groups building on our previous work [18]. We
use the explosive percolation mechanims coupled with
Ising spins, similarly as in [22]. We use a random regular
network G(N, k) with N nodes (spins, si) representing
β cells which each can be in spin up or spin down state
si ∈{1, −1}, and where each has k neighbors.
Initially, the nodes have randomly assigned spins. In
each computational step we gradually increase the pa-
rameter p that sets the number of links L = pN. We
start with an empty network successively placing links
that results from competition percolation process [12, 13]
with three potential links. The three potential links in
each step are sampled from a set of viable links composed
of all links from G(N, k) that have spins pointing in the
same direction at each end. The link that is placed in
the network in each step is the one that minimizes the
product of sizes of two clusters that the link connects.
Finally, each spin in newly connected clusters is assigned
the same, but randomly chosen direction with probabil-
ity 1 −q. If q = 0 we have complete cluster flipping of
spins as in Swendsen-Wang Ising dynamics [23], while if
q = 1 all spins in the two newly connected clusters are
randomly oriented. After each completed computational
step we compute the size of the largest connected com-
ponent and the spin orientation M = | P
i si|. The lower
panel of Figure 5 shows the collective spin orientation M
computed for two different values of q as a function of
p. For low values of q we observe a sharp increase in M
and hysteresis in dependence on p. Also, as q increases
the width of the hysteresis decreases and vanishes when
p and q reach their critical values in critical point p = pc,
q = qc leading to a second order phase transition.
Changing parameters p and q allows us to explore the
phase space of the model. For q << 1 we typically ob-
serve a hysteresis in largest component size and mag-
netization dependence on p. As we slowly increase the
parameter p we can follow the building of largest com-
ponent and observe a phase transition when p reaches
a critical value.
If we start from a connected state of
the network and slowly decrease p the largest component
vanishes at a different (lower) critical p. Simirarly, we
observe a hysteresis if we change the parameter q from
q = 0 to q = 1 and back at some fixed value of parameter
p. The first example corresponds to correlation network
construction where the links are added as the correlation
between the nodes increases and exceeds the threshold
value (fixed q in this case). The second example corre-
sponds to the case where we fix the number of links in
the network and the network structure changes as the
correlation between the nodes increases (in this case p is
fixed).
A simple and highly stylized model offers additional
insights into the nature of the phase transition in β cells
activity. Let x be the fraction of nonsynchronized cells in
the population of cells that are active when the glucose
concentration crosses the tipping point.
x is therefore
the order parameter equal to x = 0 for fully synchro-
nized and x = 1 for fully nonsynchronized state. The
rate of change is dx/dt = x(1 −x) −Px/(Q + x), where
the activation (first term) is described as simple logistic
growth. The synchronization is described by the second
term with two parameters P and Q. P can be understood
as a measure of the efficiency of communication between
cells, with higher P values indicating a more intercon-
nected network, allowing for quicker synchronization due
to an increased number of communication links. On the
other hand, Q represents a threshold or saturation pa-
rameter, which indicates how the synchronization process
slows down. In other words, P increases the probabil-
ity of synchronization through effective communication,
while Q introduces a probability that saturation effects
will slow down synchronization as the system approaches
full synchronization. In this sense P and Q play a role
similar to p and q in the microscopic model.
Due to the simple structure, the steady state solution
of the model dx/dt = 0 is analytically tractable [24] and
leads to the phase space where two spinodals P = Q and
P = (1+Q)2/4 separate the bistability region from stable
nonsynchronized and synchronized states. Traversing the
phase space with increasing and decreasing P at fixed Q
the system undergoes a first order phase transition from
x = 1 to x = 0 and back with hysteresis. The width of
the hystersis is determined by the difference between the
two tipping points and equals ∆H = (1 −Q)2/4. The
hysteresis vanishes at the critical point Qc = 1, Pc = 1
where the system undergoes a second order phase tran-
sition.
Similarly, we can make some estimates to better un-
derstand how the correlation structure of the β cell col-
lectives influences the likelihood of connections forming
between nodes in the network modeling them. Let the
strength of a node ki(t) be the sum of all correlations with
all other nodes ki(t) = P
i̸=j cij(t)/(N −1). We describe
the interaction of two nodes with mij(t) = ki(t)kj(t) and
define the probability h(t) that any two nodes in the net-
work are linked characterising the islet network state at
time t as the interaction between the nodes averaged over
all node pairs h(t) = ⟨mij⟩. This approach is similar to
the configuration network model where given the node
degree sequence the edge probability between nodes is
defined as proportional to the product of node degrees.
In the large network limit N >> 1 or when variance of
the correlation distribution is sufficiently small we simply
have h = c2
m, where cm is the mean correlation coeffi-
6
cient at time cm = P
i ki/N. The probability to connect
two nodes in the this random network model is therefore
equal to square of mean correlation. Since the critical
probability for the rise of the giant component in a ran-
dom network with N nodes is hc = 1/N, we have a simple
measure for the giant component to appear: the mean
correlations in the system must exceed cm > 1/
√
N.
Our results provide compelling evidence that β cells
undergo a first-order phase transition in response to glu-
cose stimulation, with distinct hysteresis. This behavior
suggests that pancreatic islets function as tipping ele-
ments, where small changes in glucose can lead to abrupt
shifts in β cells activity.
These findings have significant implications for our un-
derstanding of insulin secretion dynamics.
The sharp
transitions observed in β cells activity may explain the
biphasic nature of insulin release, where an initial rapid
response is followed by a slower, more sustained phase.
Additionally, the presence of hysteresis suggests that β
cells collectives may retain memory of previous glucose
levels, potentially contributing to the oscillatory nature
of insulin secretion. Each islet functions as a localized
tipping point, where small changes in glucose concen-
tration trigger a collective, synchronized response from
β cells, leading to insulin secretion. However, islets do
not operate in isolation; they are interconnected through
perfusion, innervation, and diffusion networks within the
pancreas. These connections mean that the behavior of
one islet can influence neighboring islets, creating a cas-
cade effect where synchronized activity in one islet can
propagate through the system, ensures a rapid, robust in-
sulin release, but disruptions in these connections could
lead to impaired responses, as seen in conditions like di-
abetes.
In conclusion, we demonstrate that β cells in pancre-
atic islets undergo a first-order phase transition, with dis-
tinct hysteresis, in response to changing glucose levels.
These findings provide new insights into the dynamics of
insulin secretion and highlight the role of islets as critical
regulators of metabolic homeostasis. Our network model
offers a promising framework for further exploration of
phase transitions in biological systems.
– – – – –
Acknowledgements.
MSR received financial sup-
port from by the Austrian Science Fund / Fonds
zur F¨orderung der Wissenschaftlichen Forschung (bi-
lateral
grants
I3562-B27
and
I4319-B30)
and
NIH
(R01DK127236).
DK, AS and MSR received financial
support from the Slovenian Research Agency (research
core funding program P3-0396 and projects N3-0048, N3-
0133 and N3-9289).
DK and BP were also supported
from the Slovenian Research Agency project no.J7-3156.
Code and data availability.
The data and the
code for implementation of the microscopic model,
the network construction and data analysis is avail-
able at https://github.com/deankorosak/critical_
transitions/ with additional data avaliable at https:
//doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.25507123.
Author contributions. All authors contributed sub-
stantially to all aspects of the study.
Conflict of interest. The authors declare no conflict of
interest, financial or otherwise.
∗Corresponding author:
dean.korosak@um.si
† Corresponding author:
marjan.slakrupnik@meduniwien.ac.at
[1] D. Pipeleers, Diabetologia 30, 277 (1987).
[2] D. L. Curry, L. L. Bennett,
and G. M. Grodsky, En-
docrinology 83, 572 (1968).
[3] R. Nesher and E. Cerasi, Endocrinology 121, 1017
(1987).
[4] C. B. Wollheim and G. Sharp, Physiological reviews 61,
914 (1981).
[5] J. Fernandez and M. Valdeolmillos, FEBS letters 477, 33
(2000).
[6] A. Stoˇzer, J. Dolenˇsek, and M. S. Rupnik, PloS one 8,
e54638 (2013).
[7] A. Stoˇzer, M. S. Klemen, M. Gosak, L. K. Bombek,
V. Pohorec, M. S. Rupnik,
and J. Dolenˇsek, American
Journal of Physiology-Endocrinology and Metabolism
(2021).
[8] M. Valdeolmillos, A. Gomis, and J. V. S´anchez-Andr´es,
The Journal of Physiology 493, 9 (1996).
[9] T. H. Hraha, M. J. Westacott, M. Pozzoli, A. M. Notary,
P. M. McClatchey, and R. K. Benninger, PLoS compu-
tational biology 10, e1003819 (2014).
[10] I. Stamper, E. Jackson, and X. Wang, Physical Review
E 89, 012719 (2014).
[11] H. E. Stanley, Phase transitions and critical phenomena,
Vol. 7 (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1971).
[12] D. Achlioptas, R. M. D’Souza,
and J. Spencer, science
323, 1453 (2009).
[13] J. Nagler, A. Levina, and M. Timme, Nature Physics 7,
265 (2011).
[14] J. Sanchez-Andres, A. Gomis, and M. Valdeolmillos, The
Journal of Physiology 486, 223 (1995).
[15] R. K. Benninger, W. S. Head, M. Zhang, L. S. Satin,
and D. W. Piston, The Journal of physiology 589, 5453
(2011).
[16] A. Rohatgi, “Webplotdigitizer: Version 4.5,” (2021).
[17] S.
Posti´c,
S.
Sarikas,
J.
Pfabe,
V.
Pohorec,
L. Kriˇzanˇci´c Bombek, N. Sluga, M. Skelin Klemen,
J. Dolenˇsek, D. Koroˇsak, A. Stoˇzer, et al., American
Journal of Physiology-Endocrinology and Metabolism
324, E42 (2023).
[18] D.
Koroˇsak,
M.
Jusup,
B.
Podobnik,
A.
Stoˇzer,
J. Dolenˇsek, P. Holme,
and M. S. Rupnik, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 127, 168101 (2021).
[19] F. Chung, L. Lu, and V. Vu, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 100, 6313 (2003).
[20] K. Rajan and L. F. Abbott, Physical review letters 97,
188104 (2006).
7
[21] G. Buccheri, S. Marmi,
and R. N. Mantegna, Physi-
cal Review E—Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Matter
Physics 88, 012806 (2013).
[22] S. Angst, S. R. Dahmen, H. Hinrichsen, A. Hucht, and
M. P. Magiera, Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory
and Experiment 2012, L06002 (2012).
[23] R. H. Swendsen and J.-S. Wang, Physical review letters
58, 86 (1987).
[24] I. Bose and S. Ghosh, Journal of Statistical Mechanics:
Theory and Experiment 2019, 043403 (2019).
