Phenotype structuring in collective cell migration:
a tutorial of mathematical models and methods
Tommaso Lorenzi1, Kevin J. Painter2, Chiara Villa3
1Department of Mathematical Sciences “G. L. Lagrange”, Politecnico di
Torino, Corso Duca degli Abruzzi, 24, Torino, 10129, Italy.
2Dipartimento Interateneo di Scienze, Progetto e Politiche del Territorio,
Politecnico di Torino, Viale Pier Andrea Mattioli, 39, Torino, 10125, Italy.
3Sorbonne Universit´e, CNRS, Universit´e de Paris, Inria, Laboratoire
Jacques-Louis Lions UMR 7598, 75005 Paris, France.
Contributing authors: tommaso.lorenzi@polito.it;
kevin.painter@polito.it; chiara.villa.1@sorbonne-universite.fr;
Abstract
Populations are heterogeneous, deviating in numerous ways. Phenotypic diversity
refers to the range of traits or characteristics across a population, where for cells
this could be the levels of signalling, movement and growth activity, etc. Clearly,
the phenotypic distribution – and how this changes over time and space – could
be a major determinant of population-level dynamics. For instance, across a can-
cerous population, variations in movement, growth, and ability to evade death
may determine its growth trajectory and response to therapy. In this review,
we discuss how classical partial differential equation (PDE) approaches for mod-
elling cellular systems and collective cell migration can be extended to include
phenotypic structuring. The resulting non-local models – which we refer to as
phenotype-structured partial integro-differential equations (PS-PIDEs) – form a
sophisticated class of models with rich dynamics. We set the scene through a
brief history of structured population modelling, and then review the extension
of several classic movement models – including the Fisher-KPP and Keller-Segel
equations – into a PS-PIDE form. We proceed with a tutorial-style section on
derivation, analysis, and simulation techniques. First, we show a method to
formally derive these models from underlying agent-based models. Second, we
recount travelling waves in PDE models of spatial spread dynamics and con-
centration phenomena in non-local PDE models of evolutionary dynamics, and
combine the two to deduce phenotypic structuring across travelling waves in
PS-PIDE models. Third, we discuss numerical methods to simulate PS-PIDEs,
1
arXiv:2410.13629v1  [q-bio.CB]  17 Oct 2024
illustrating with a simple scheme based on the method of lines and noting the
finer points of consideration. We conclude with a discussion of future modelling
and mathematical challenges.
Keywords: Phenotype-structured populations, Collective cell dynamics, Cell
movement, Non-local PDEs, Travelling waves, Concentration phenomena
MSC Classification: 35C07 , 35R09 , 92B05 , 92C17 , 92D25
1 Introduction
‘Although everybody seems to have a good intuitive idea of what is meant by a pop-
ulation, one has to sharpen this concept considerably if one attempts to formulate
statements about populations in mathematical language.’ The above quote, of Heinz
von Foerster (von Foerster, 1959), conveys a reality commonly swept under the carpet
within simple definitions for a ‘population’ in some model. Often, we airily define a
population – whether of cells or animals – but tacitly exclude the variation within that
arises due to different ages, sizes, chemistry, genetics, phenotypes, etc. Simplifying a
population into a group of more or less identical individuals is convenient.
Suppose we wish to model the evolving distribution of some population – which
we will take to be of cells – where the individuals can proliferate, die, and move: these
could be bacteria within a petri-dish, embryonic cells organising to form a tissue,
immune cells during an inflammation response, and so forth. A natural and classical
approach is to assume the individuals are (more or less) identical and postulate a
reaction-advection-diffusion equation for the density ρ(t, x), at time t ≥0 and spatial
position x ∈X ⊆Rd, where d ≥1 is the dimensionality of the physical space,
∂tρ + ∇x · [ Ax(t, x) ρ −Dx(t, x) ∇xρ] = F(t, x) .
(1)
Here the dependency on (t, x) of Ax, Dx and F may also be mediated by ρ itself,
introducing non-linearities in the equation. The kinetics function F describes prolifer-
ation and death, while cell migration is split into two components: an advective term
with advective velocity Ax, to describe directed movements, e.g. from guidance cues in
the environment; a diffusive term with diffusion coefficient Dx, to describe undirected
(random) movements. The above can of course be extended to systems of coupled
equations to define key additional dependent variables. A vast range of models have
been built with equations that conform to this structure, including many classical
systems found within standard textbooks, e.g. Murray (2003).
However, it has long been recognised that populations are rarely (if ever) homo-
geneous – some members may move faster, some may proliferate more quickly, etc –
with potentially important consequences. Further, our technological capacity to finely
discriminate the various forms of cellular heterogeneity is ever increasing: a reper-
toire of markers that highlight progression through the cell cycle, allowing an ‘age
distribution’ to be tracked (Eastman and Guo, 2020); super resolution microscopy
(Jacquemet et al., 2020), that allows cell shape, size and structure to be recorded
2
with unprecedented detail; protein and mRNA staining techniques (flow cytometry,
immunocytochemistry, mass spectronomy, and so forth, see Figure 1(c)) provide infor-
mation on the distribution of traits at a molecular level (Specht et al., 2017; Hu et al.,
2018). In numerous systems, the sharpened picture afforded by these techniques has
heightened our understanding into how population distributions are shaped by hetero-
geneity. To provide a couple of apposite examples: much recent attention has focused
on the form of invading cancers, and their structuring from more migratory ‘leader’
cells at the front to more proliferative ‘follower’ cells at the rear (Vilchez Mercedes
et al., 2021), see Figure 1(a); microfabricated mazes reveal the phenotypic structure
within E. coli bacteria populations, via sorting them according to their ability to
respond to chemical gradients by chemotaxis (Salek et al., 2019), see Figure 1(b).
The onus, therefore, is placed on theoreticians to further develop the mathemati-
cal theory that can accommodate this more refined level of information: following the
above advice of von Foerster, when formulating a model we need precise definitions
that fully capture a population’s most critical variables. Adopting a standard nomen-
clature, we will refer to a population’s distribution across some variable – whether
age, size, shape, etc – as a structuring. Frameworks that permit structure to be incor-
porated into models date back to the early days of modern mathematical biology.
Initially these methods were formulated in order to understand population demograph-
ics, leading to age-structured models, but subsequently expanded to account for size
structuring and many other variables as deemed relevant.
We will review briefly this literature, but then turn our attention to mathematical
methods and tools that can be used to model and analyse the evolving spatiotemporal
distribution of a (cell) population, where the population members also span a (poten-
tially broad) spectrum of phenotypes or traits: distinct traits could refer to differences
in proliferative potential, their capacity to migrate, their ability to evade death, and so
on. Phenotype variation within such models may range from a (relatively) simplistic
binary description, to phenotypes extending across some high-dimensional continuum
of states, see Figure 1(c). Models of this nature have become increasingly influential in
recent years, a natural response to the large number of experimental studies that have
revealed the role of different phenotypes when driving large scale population dynamics.
Retaining the notation ρ(t, x) to describe the density at time t and position x, the
models we focus on assume a further structuring of the population according to the
phenotypic state of the population members, denoted y ∈Y ⊆Rp, where p ≥1 is
the dimensionality of the phenotypic space. We then define n(t, x, y) as the phenotype
density at time t, position x, and phenotypic state y, and note that the (total) density
is then
ρ(t, x) :=
Z
Y
n(t, x, y) dy .
The models we review here represent the extension of the basic reaction-advection-
diffusion framework (1) to accommodate any impacts from phenotypic structuring.
First, this involves including dependencies on the phenotypic state y on the various
terms introduced above, so that the characteristic of a particular phenotype (e.g.
higher proliferation, lower migration) can be incorporated. Second, it requires the
1Figures adapted from Celi`a-Terrassa et al. (2018): (i) Western blot extracted from Figure 2d; (ii) Flow
cytometry from Figure 1g; (iii) Immunofluorescence from Figure 1f.
3
Fig. 1 Examples of phenotype heterogeneity and its experimental exposition. (a) Het-
erogeneity has been intensively studied for its role during cancer invasion, one convenient concept
being a division into ‘followers’ and ‘leaders’. Leader cells have proteolytic and migratory capabilities
that allow them to modify and infiltrate the surrounding extracellular matrix; follower cells expand
into the space behind the migrating leaders. For further information, e.g. see Vilchez Mercedes et al.
(2021). (b) An example of how experiments can reveal phenotypic structuring in a population. A
T-maze sorts E. coli cells according to their chemotactic sensitivity: those with stronger responses
penetrate deeper into the maze. Figure adapted from the study of Salek et al. (2019). (c) A range of
proteomic methods can provide quantitative data on phenotypic states, including: (i) population-wide
average levels of protein expression (e.g. western blot); (ii) protein expression distributions across the
population, also from bulk measurements (e.g. flow cytometry); (iii) spatial distributions of protein
expression levels, at single-cell and tissue levels (e.g. immunofluorescence). Adapted1 from Celi`a-
Terrassa et al. (2018) and licensed under CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),
see the original manuscript for precise information on the depicted data. (d) Potential ways of clas-
sifying phenotypic variation: (Top) Simple binary variation, where a population is divided into two
principal types (e.g. the ‘follower’ or ‘leader’ types in (a)); (Middle) Phenotypes spanning a 1D contin-
uum (e.g. chemotactic sensitivities revealed in T-maze experiments); (Bottom) Phenotypes spanning
a higher dimension continuum, e.g. migratory capacity, proliferative capacity, and resistance (i.e. abil-
ity to evade death).
incorporation of additional terms to describe potential transitions through phenotypic
space. Specifically, we will review models built on the following structure:









∂tn + ∇x · [ Ax(t, x, y) n −Dx(t, x, y) ∇xn]
+∇y · [ Ay(t, x, y) n −Dy(t, x, y) ∇yn ] = F(t, x, y) ,
ρ(t, x) :=
Z
Y
n(t, x, y) dy ,
(2)
4
where the dependency on (t, x, y) of Ax, Dx, Ay, Dy, and F may be mediated by ρ and
n, introducing non-linearities and non-localities into the equation. Analogous to move-
ments through space, phenotypic transitions can potentially occur in either a directed
(e.g. factors in the environment that direct cells to switch from one phenotypic state
to another) or undirected (e.g. a spontaneous mutation) fashion. Consequently, we
introduce the two additional functions Ay and Dy to describe directed and undirected
transitions, respectively. Noting that the above equation extends the partial differen-
tial equation (PDE) (1) through both additional phenotype structuring and a potential
dependence on the (total) density ρ, we refer to this as a phenotype-structured partial
integro-differential equation (PS-PIDE).
The remainder of the review is laid out as follows. In the next section we provide a
select historical overview, charting a few key modelling studies that have laid ground-
work for the PS-PIDE models under review here. In Section 3 we review the extension
of classic PDE models of cell motion of form (1) to the PS-PIDE form (2), focusing
on some prototypical examples. In Section 4 we discuss the methods that allow these
models to be derived from agent-based models and tools that enable their analysis,
particularly in the context of travelling wave behaviour and concentration phenom-
ena, and numerical simulation. Finally, we conclude with a brief discussion, organised
into a series of future challenges for the field.
2 Structured population modelling
Models that incorporate population structuring have been around for more than
a century and a broad range of approaches have been developed. Here we offer a
short summary, concentrating on works most directly related to the PS-PIDE models
described above (for a wider discussion, we refer to Hoppenstaedt 1975; Perthame 2006;
Webb 1985; Metz and Diekmann 1986; Charlesworth 1994; Cushing 1998; Caswell
2001; Kot 2001; Auger et al. 2008).
2.1 Structured populations and early modelling
Population counts date almost 6,000 years ago to early Mesopotamian civilisations
and, subsequently, cultures from Egypt to China (Halacy, 1980). Surveys served pur-
poses from economic (how much tax can we collect?) to militaristic (how many can
fight?), but lacked information on population structure: usually, only the numbers of
(able) men were recorded with women, children, or the infirm unstated2. Censuses
that include information on population structure form a (comparatively) recent under-
taking, sometimes part-triggered by population growth concerns: the first (modern)
UK census of 1801 took place in the aftermath of the controversy that surrounded
Malthus’ 1798 essay on population growth (Malthus, 1798). Over time, censuses were
expanded to collect3 greater information on population structure.
2Some records from China dating to the 5th century AD did indicate ages, sexes, and relationships of
household members, see Durand (1960).
3UK Censuses in the latter half of the 19th century even requested numbers of ‘lunatics’, ‘imbeciles’, or
‘idiots’ living in a household, leading the Registrar General in 1881 to question the value of this information
(ONS, 2016): “It is against human nature to expect a mother to admit her young child to be an idiot,
however much she may fear this to be true. To acknowledge the fact is to abandon all hope.”.
5
Descriptions of cellular populations have also undergone increased refinement,
with scientific advances as the primary driver. Earliest observations were limited by
microscopic power, but by the early 1900s variations in size could be accurately
recorded (Jennings, 1908). Recent developments – such as live cell imaging with highly
specific fluorescence markers (Specht et al., 2017) and a plethora of ‘multi-omics’
methodologies (Hu et al., 2018) – have unlocked our capacity to analyse the inherent
heterogeneity present across cells and tissues.
Faced with this data, the question of how to describe a population is key to mod-
elling. Early models – such as exponential growth ideas expounded by the likes of
Malthus (1798), or the logistic growth model of Verhulst (1838) – describe only total
population over time, yet these models remain popular when structured information
is missing, considered negligible, or dismissed. Models that include structuring date to
the work of Alfred Lotka4 on demography in the early 1900s (Lotka, 1907b,a; Sharpe
and Lotka, 1911). Lotka’s model took the form of a renewal equation and described
a population’s evolving age distribution; analysis was used to determine whether a
population would evolve to a stable age distribution.
The compartmental approach of McKendrick (1926)5 supposed a population in
which members transition between compartments, each representing a population
state (e.g. age, class, infectivity). As a simple example, suppose N c
t denotes the num-
ber of individuals in compartment c at time t. To write down an equation for N c
t+τ,
where τ is some time increment, we set F c→c′
t
to denote the transition function such
that an individual has moved from state c at time t into state c′ by time t + τ. If we
simplify the state space to a single dimension, position compartments at regular inter-
vals on a one-dimensional lattice of spacing l, and restrict transitions to neighbouring
compartments, then the equation for N c
t+τ derives from simple balancing:
N c
t+τ = N c
t F c→c
t
+ N c−l
t
F c−l→c
t
+ N c+l
t
F c+l→c
t
.
(3)
Naturally, the above can be generalised to higher dimensions, transitions between
non-adjacent compartments, etc. This represents a discrete approach to population
structure: the element of heterogeneity is discretised into boxes or intervals that span
some state space, with individuals entering or exiting as they change their state.
Discrete approaches have proven enormously popular when it comes to modelling pop-
ulation structure, a powerful method being the matrix population methods conceived
in the 1940s (Bernardelli, 1941; Leslie, 1945). We do not address such methods here,
noting that others have covered these ideas in depth, e.g. Caswell (2001). Rather, we
shift our attention to continuous approaches, and in particular to structured PDE
models related to (2).
4Well-known for the Lotka-Volterra equations, but demographics formed his main research area and later
worked for the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company. The Lotka-Volterra model can also be regarded as a
structured population model, structured into predators and prey.
5Anderson McKendrick, celebrated for his work with William Kermack that laid out a theory of mathe-
matical epidemiology, was a physician of remarkable mathematical intuition: “McKendrick stands in a class
by himself. That a man who spent most of his early life in the Indian Medical Service and who was curator
of the College of Physicians at Edinburgh afterwards should have anticipated, by so long, so much of the
work done later on stochastic processes in this field, is a most remarkable circumstance (Irwin, 1963).” Com-
partmentalisation into susceptibles, infected, and recovered leads to SIR-type equations and these classic
models were introduced in subsequent work with Kermack (Kermack and McKendrick, 1927).
6
Fig. 2 Illustrative output of the McKendrick-von Foerster equation. Top panels show the
evolving rescaled age distribution, n(t, a)/ρ(t); bottom panels plot the age distribution n(t, a) at select
times. Here we assume in (4) that: (i) the population is initially concentrated towards newborns –
i.e. n0(a) := ρ0e−a, where ρ0 is proportional to the initial size of the population (for convenience,
we set ρ0 = 1); (ii) the death rate increases linearly with age (i.e. µ(t, a, n, ρ) ≡µ(a) := 0.001a);
and (iii) births result from a Gaussian-like distribution centred about age a = 25 (i.e. β(t, a, n, ρ) ≡
β(a) := (4 exp−(a−25)2/(2σ2))/(
√
2πσ2)), for (a) dispersed births (σ = 4), and (b) concentrated
births (σ = 0.25). In the initial phase, we see a generation that ages with time and new birth “spikes”
yielding a new generation as the previous generation reaches a = 25. However, over longer times, the
rescaled age distribution reaches a steady-state profile (though this takes longer when births are more
concentrated). Note that a steady-state rescaled age distribution does not imply the population size
itself is stabilising – e.g. for these simulations ρ(t) increases exponentially in time.
2.2 Age-structured models
PDE representations of structured populations hold a prominent position within
mathematical biology, admitting complex population heterogeneity within a compact
framework that can be amenable to analysis. The most well-known model in the field
– the McKendrick-von Foerster equation6 – describes the evolving density of a pop-
ulation, n(t, a), structured across age a ∈[0, ∞) at time t ∈[0, ∞). In a generalised
form:



















∂tn + ∂an = −µ(t, a, n, ρ)n ,
a ∈(0, ∞) ,
ρ(t) :=
Z ∞
0
n(t, a) da ,
n(0, a) = n0(a) ≥0 ,
n(t, 0) =
Z ∞
0
β(t, a, n, ρ)n(t, a) da .
(4)
In (4)1, age and time progress in tandem and the right-hand side describes loss or
death, with rate µ, where ρ(t) is the (total) population size at time t. The condition at
t = 0 is the initial age distribution of the population, i.e. some non-negative function
on [0, ∞). The condition at a = 0 represents births, with β the birth rate due to
individuals of age a. For cell proliferation β and µ may be linked: for example, β = 2µ
if a proliferation leads to two identical daughter cells – we refer to Perthame (2006) for
6According to the field, sometimes just the McKendrick or von Foerster equation.
7
more discussion on applications of similar models to cell populations. The model (4)
is of form (2), but with no space dependency and linear advection describing state
transitioning. Dynamics predict the evolving age structure; for example, in Figure 2 a
formulation is shown whereby early waves of distinct generations eventually give way
to a stable distribution (but not necessarily stable population size).
The different names given to (4) highlight its repeated discovery: beyond those of
McKendrick (1926) and von Foerster (1959)7 it was derived by Kendall (1949) and
Scherbaum and Rasch (1957). Different derivations were slightly different in form –
for example, a range from µ ≡0 in Scherbaum and Rasch (1957) to a non-local depen-
dency µ(ρ) in Gurtin and MacCamy (1974). The derivation in McKendrick (1926) is
the first documented, where age-structuring was used to illustrate8 the compartmen-
tal approach when both time and the population state variable could be regarded as
continuous. The state space then represents age (we change c to a in (3)), age and
time are absolutely correlated, and ageing is (unfortunately) a one-way process: we
can therefore set l ≡τ and F a→a
t
= F a+τ→a
t
= 0. Not all individuals progress to the
next age class (as some will die), leading to F a−τ→a
a
= 1 −µτ where µτ is the frac-
tion of the population with age a −τ at time t that die before they reach age a at
time t + τ . Substituting these into (3), expanding about (t, a) and taking the limit as
τ →0, one formally arrives at (4)1 under continuity assumptions.
As noted, a derivation of (4) is also found in Kendall (1949), for a stochastic
birth-death process that accounted for age structuring of a population. These earlier
derivations went somewhat under the radar (at least in the context of growth kinet-
ics), with wider awareness not emerging until the 1960s – primarily to describe cellular
growth – following the derivations of Scherbaum and Rasch (1957) and von Foerster
(1959). The naming after von Foerster appears to originate in Trucco (1965b,a), and
the 1960s witnessed its wider application to problems in cellular kinetics (e.g. Fredrick-
son and Tsuchiya 1963; Trucco 1965b,a; Rubinow 1968) and population demographics
(e.g. Hoppenstaedt 1975; Keyfitz 1972).
2.3 Age- and space-structured models
Age is one way a population can be structured, but model (4) can be straightforwardly
extended to include other forms of heterogeneity. One approach would be to add
a discrete structuring, such as coupling two equations of type (4)1 to account for
female and male members of a population (Fredrickson, 1971; Keyfitz, 1972). Further
continuous structure can be added, with early extensions to size and age structures
proposed in Fredrickson and Tsuchiya (1963); Bell and Anderson (1967) and Sinko
and Streifer (1967), for cell and animal populations, respectively. Generalisations to a
p-dimensional “physiological state vector” were first made in Fredrickson et al. (1967),
and we refer to Gyllenberg (1983); Webb (1985); Tucker and Zimmerman (1988);
7Heinz von Foerster was a biophysicist with wide-ranging interests, including population growth; his
“Doomsday equation” predicted that human population growth rate would become infinite (on November
13th, 2026) (Von Foerster et al., 1960). Tongue was firmly in cheek here, as the exact day coincided with
what would have been his birthday.
8Remarkably, the study of McKendrick (1926) used more than ten case applications, often based on data,
in examples that included: house to house cancer incidence rates in Luckau, Germany; cholera epidemics
in India; bacteria ingestion by leukocytes; infection and relapse in malaria; and, bacteria-antibody conflict,
amongst several others.
8
Webb (2008) for further discussion of high-dimensional structured population models.
Other structuring variables may not obey the strict correlation of age with time, for
example size may increase or decrease over time; as such, different transport terms
may be needed to describe movements through the structuring variable state space.
Physical space is frequently one of the most crucial population structuring vari-
ables. Of course, mathematical models that account for spatiotemporal evolution
have a long and illustrious history, frequently using the reaction-advection-diffusion
form (1); we rarely refer to these as structured population models, though. Particularly
pertinent here, however, are extensions of age-structured models to include spatial
movement. These were first introduced by Gurtin and others (Gurtin, 1973; Gurtin
and MacCamy, 1977, 1981), where a diffusive-type spatial movement was added to
an age-structured population. Starting with model (4), but extending to a population
n(t, x, a) for time t, position x ∈X ⊂Rd and age a ∈[0, ∞), yields























∂tn + ∂an −∇x · [D(a)∇n] = −µ(t, x, a, n, ρ)n ,
x ∈X , a ∈(0, ∞) ,
ρ(t, x) :=
Z ∞
0
n(t, x, a) da ,
n(0, x, a) = n0(x, a) ,
n(t, x, 0) =
Z ∞
0
β(t, x, a, n, ρ)n(t, x, a) da ,
ν · D(a)∇n = q(t, x, a) for x ∈∂X ,
where ν is the outer unit normal on the domain boundary ∂X. The above is of PS-
PIDE form, adapted and furnished with boundary and initial conditions relevant for
a population structured in age and space. Structured models that include variation in
space have subsequently received a huge amount of attention: a rather indiscriminate
list includes Garroni and Langlais (1982); Webb (1982); Langlais (1985); Fitzgibbon
et al. (1996); Ainseba and Langlais (2000); Al-Omari and Gourley (2002); Ayati (2006);
Ayati et al. (2006); Delgado et al. (2006); Dyson et al. (2007); Gandolfi et al. (2011);
Domschke et al. (2017); Fitzgibbon et al. (2018); Deng et al. (2020); Kang and Ruan
(2021), and involve applications from ecology to cancer growth. Indeed, the primary
focus of the rest of this review will be on population models where the structuring is
in space and phenotype. In this regard, we also note that variants of (4) for age- and
phenotype-structured populations have recently been considered (Nordmann et al.,
2018).
2.4 Phenotype-structured models
The word phenotype refers to the observable features or characteristics of a cell or
organism, a term first proposed in Johannsen (1911) to distinguish an individual’s
genetic material (the genotype) from its result (the phenotype). Uses of the term have
rapidly increased: a naive search within article titles reveals almost 25,000 entries since
2020 (Scopus, 10/10/2024). Used for cell populations, it can refer to physical char-
acteristics (such as shape, size), molecular (such as gene/mRNA/protein expression),
9
and behaviours (such as migration, proliferation). With respect to the historical mod-
els above, variations in age (progression through cell cycle), size, and physiological
state could all relate to phenotypic structuring.
The drivers of phenotypic heterogeneity are diverse. The environment is one impor-
tant factor – e.g. as demonstrated by the distinct patterns of metabolic activity that
emerge in a microbial population subject to diverse nutrient levels (Schreiber and
Ackermann, 2020). Interactions between individuals can also drive heterogeneity: a
‘salt-and-pepper’ expression pattern forms across certain embryonic cell populations
in development, driven by Delta/Notch-mediated interactions between adjacent cells
(Shaya and Sprinzak, 2011). Even in the absence of other drivers, phenotypic diver-
sity can arise in clonal cell populations solely through stochastic variation in gene
expression (Elowitz et al., 2002).
Growing appreciation into phenotypic variation has led to numerous mathematical
models that can be used to understand how it impacts on the spatiotemporal evolution
of cellular systems. At a broad level, these attempts can be grouped into two main
classes, each with two subclasses:
• Discrete population models, with discrete or continuous phenotypic states;
• Continuous populations models, with discrete or continuous phenotypic states.
Discrete population approaches are (usually) predicated on agent-based models
(ABMs), where each agent is an individual cell with an assigned phenotypic state;
this state is then a determinant of the rules that govern the agent’s behaviour. The
flexibility of ABMs, coupled to increased computational power, has led to their rapid
expansion in biological modelling (e.g. see Grimm and Railsback 2005; Drasdo et al.
2018; Metzcar et al. 2019; Van Liedekerke et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2015 and references
therein); it is far beyond the scope of this review to cover these in depth, so we just
confine to broad remarks. Within each agent the phenotypic state could be discrete
or continuous and fixed or variable. Under discrete states, an agent is restricted to
occupying one of a finite set of states, whereas under continuous states the phenotype
spans a continuum. For varying states, an agent’s phenotypic state can change over
time, e.g. as a result of interactions with other cells or the environment. For example,
this could be enacted through equipping each cell with a dynamical system to describe
intracellular signalling; various open source toolkits are available for implementing
such ABMs – e.g. see the review by Metzcar et al. (2019).
Continuous approaches assume that the population can be represented by a con-
tinuum, i.e. as a density distribution. As above, these can be further divided into those
with discrete or continuous phenotype states. Under the former, the overall dynamics
are represented by a system of (typically coupled) evolution equations, each ODE or
PDE describing the evolution of the density of individuals with a certain phenotype.
Models of this type have become popular in recent years, in particular to describe how
cellular heterogeneity can impact on cancer progression, invasion, and treatment (e.g.
Gatenby and Gawlinski 2003; Fedotov and Iomin 2007; Gerlee and Nelander 2012;
Pham et al. 2012; Stepien et al. 2018; Strobl et al. 2020; Crossley et al. 2024). Rely-
ing on just a few phenotype states – such as a binary description, see Figure 1(d)
10
– these models fall into the general class of low(ish) order ODE/PDE systems and
can be approached analytically with standard techniques (linear stability, bifurcation
analyses etc). Continuous models in which the phenotype enters as a continuous struc-
turing variable represent a further step up in model complexity, but also benefit from
a capacity to capture the complex heterogeneity often present in a population. Many
models of this type fall into the PS-PIDE structure (2), and we will be using the rest
of this review to describe these in more detail.
3 PDEs to PS-PIDEs for biological movement
The PDE (1) underpins many models and has been tailored to describe various types
of movement. We use this section to discuss the extension of some classic PDE mod-
els of form (1) into the PS-PIDE form (2). In cell systems, dynamics are regulated
by the interactions between cells and other components of the extracellular environ-
ment. For this reason, the dependency on (t, x) of the terms Ax, Dx, Ay, Dy, and
F in (2) may be mediated by macroscopic quantities, in addition to the density ρ,
modelling other biotic (e.g. densities of cells of other populations) and abiotic factors
(e.g. concentrations of soluble molecules and densities of insoluble polymers) in the
microenvironment. These in turn may satisfy their own evolution equations, but for
the sake of conciseness we will not discuss them here. The definitions of Ax and Dx
will depend on the type of movement one seeks to represent, and in the following we
will consider some standard forms corresponding to different cell migration models.
Note also that while in this section we retain the notation introduced in Section 1,
considering a p-dimensional phenotypic structure (p ≥1), the majority of the mod-
elling works in the extant literature cited below consider a one-dimensional phenotypic
structure (p = 1). As a further note, the PDEs and PS-PIDEs presented in this section
– when posed on bounded domains – are subject to zero-flux boundary conditions,
unless stated otherwise.
3.1 Diffusion-based movement models
Linear (or Fickian) diffusion describes the effect of Brownian motion at the macro-
scopic scale (i.e. the undirected motion of particles randomly moving in space), and
follows from Fick’s first law (Fick, 1855). The relative simplicity of this form has led
to its adoption in many models of biological motion – both of cells and animals – and
is a component of a mathematical biology mainstay: the Fisher-KPP equation, which
we adopt as an exemplar.
Proposed in Fisher (1937) and Kolmogorov et al. (1937), the Fisher-KPP equation
forms travelling waves for a population that expands about its focal point (see Figure 3)
and lies at the basis of models for processes that range from ecological invasions to
tumour growth. In its textbook statement, linear diffusion is combined with logistic
growth so that one defines Dx ≡D, Ax ≡0, F := ρR(ρ) in (1) and obtains
∂tρ = D∇2
xρ + ρR(ρ) ,
x ∈X .
(5)
11
Fig. 3 Illustration of travelling waves from the Fisher-KPP model. Illustrative outputs of
the Fisher-KPP model (5)-(6), with x ≡x ∈[0, 50], subject to zero-flux boundary conditions. In
particular, evolution to travelling waves is shown for the rescaled PDE (28), complemented with an
initial condition of form (29), with (a) ε = 1, (b) ε = 0.1, (c) ε = 0.01. In each case the density
ρ(t, x) is plotted at times t = 5 (blue lines), t = 10 (green lines), t = 15 (red lines), and t = 20 (red
lines). We see an evolution of the solutions towards a travelling wave profile with wave speed c = 2
(numerically calculated wave speeds v reported for each simulation at times t = 5 and t = 20). As
ε →0, this occurs on a fast timescale and the profile becomes increasingly step-like, from ρ ≡1 across
the wave to ρ ≡0 ahead of the wave, in agreement with analytical predictions.
Here the parameter D ∈R+ is the (constant) diffusivity and the function R is the
growth rate of the population, which is of the logistic form
R(ρ) := r

1 −ρ
k

,
(6)
where r ∈R+
∗is the intrinsic growth rate (i.e. the growth rate when ρ = 0) and
k ∈R+
∗
9 is the local carrying capacity.
A conventional reading of (5) suggests a single (i.e. homogeneous) population
model, but the original works of Fisher (1937) and Kolmogorov et al. (1937) were, in
fact, for structured (i.e. heterogeneous) populations. For example, Fisher was inves-
tigating10 the spread of advantage-gaining mutations. Under this motivation, the
function ρ in (5) describes the density of the ‘daughter’ population of an allelomorph
pair, with the density of the ‘parent’ population set by k −ρ under an assumption
that the combined daughter and parent density is constant. The travelling waves that
can arise (see Figure 3) then describe how the daughter population expands to replace
the parent. As such, the well-known Fisher-KPP equation – as originally intended –
described the evolving heterogeneous structure in a population, albeit under a highly
simple scenario.
How can we generalise this to incorporate even greater structuring, i.e. a population
continuously structured across some phenotypic space? Let us consider the phenotype
density n(t, x, y) and allow transitions to take place between the phenotypic states
y ∈Y. Taking the PS-PIDE form (2), it is common to assume that phenotypic changes
can be described by a linear diffusion process, so that Ay ≡0 and Dy ≡¯D. In
cell populations, such a modelling approach is natural, say, if changes are driven by
stochastic fluctuations of signalling pathways (Chisholm et al., 2016). If the phenotype
9In the remainder of the paper, we will use the notation R+
∗
:= R+ \ {0}, where R+ is the set of
non-negative real numbers.
10In commenting on this background to (5), we should mention the roots to eugenics: Fisher (1937)
appeared in the (discontinued) Annals of Eugenics and Fisher was an editor of the journal. This field became
increasingly politicised and notorious across the first decades of the 20th century, so our discussion here is
just to highlight that the common interpretation of (5) as a single population model had, in its origin, a
structured population in mind.
12
Fig. 4 Illustration of travelling waves from a PS-PIDE model of diffusion-based move-
ment. Illustrative output of the PS-PIDE model of diffusion-based movement (7). Here, we consider
one dimension in each of physical and phenotype space, such that x ≡x ∈[0, L] with L ∈R+
∗
and y ≡y ∈[0, 1]. Zero-flux conditions are imposed at the boundaries and the population is ini-
tially set such that n(0, x, y) = 0.1e−100x. We take D(y) := y and define R(y, ρ) := r(y) −κρ, with
r(y) := 10(1 −y) and κ = 10. These definitions describe a trade-off in which the most motile popula-
tion members (y ≈1) have the lowest proliferation rate, while the least motile members (y ≈0) have
the highest proliferation rate. Simulations are for (a) ¯D = 10−1, (b) ¯D = 10−3, and (c) ¯D = 10−5.
Note that L = 100 in (a-b) and L = 200 in (c), due to the longer time it takes to evolve to the travel-
ling wave profile in (c). Top row displays the phenotype density function n(t, x, y) with the different
colour-themes corresponding to different times (colour bars in (c)). Central row displays the density
ρ(t, x) at the same times, showing the evolution to travelling wave solutions. Bottom row displays
the density ρ at (a-b) t = 25 and (c) t = 50, where the colour code indicates the locally prevailing
phenotype, ¯y(t, x) ≡¯y(t, x), across the wave for (a-b) t = 25 and (c) t = 50. Broadly speaking, low-
ering the diffusivity in phenotype space (i.e. reducing the value of the rate of phenotypic changes ¯D)
leads to an increasingly structured profile, where more mobile members dominate the front of the
wave and more proliferative members dominate the rear.
of population members impact on both their motility and proliferation rate, a natural
extension of (5) is then to the following PS-PIDE formulation:





∂tn = D(y)∇2
xn + ¯D∇2
yn + nR(y, ρ) ,
x ∈X , y ∈Y ,
ρ(t, x) :=
Z
Y
n(t, x, y) dy .
(7)
In the framework of PS-PIDE models of form (7), the parameter ¯D ∈R+ can be
regarded as the rate of phenotypic changes. Furthermore, the function R(y, ρ) models
the net proliferation rate (i.e. the difference between the rate of proliferation and
the rate of death) of population members in the phenotypic state y under the local
environmental conditions corresponding to the density ρ. Hence, it can be regarded as
the fitness function or the fitness landscape of the population at position x (B¨urger,
2000).
13
Depending on the assumptions that are made on the functions and parameters of
the model, PS-PIDEs of form (7) can produce phenotype-structured travelling waves,
wherein the locally prevailing phenotype, ¯y, at different positions – which we define
as the point ¯y(t, x) such that n(t, x, ¯y(t, x)) = max
y∈Y n(t, x, y) – varies across the wave
(see Figure 4). These can be seen as phenotypically heterogeneous waves of invasion,
whereby population members in different phenotypic states dominate different parts
of the wave.
Variants of PS-PIDE models of form (7) for situations in which the phenotype
structure is not linked to the motility of the population members (i.e. when D(y) ≡D)
have received attention from the mathematical community for the richness of the
properties of their solutions (Arnold et al., 2012; Li et al., 2024). On the other hand,
variants of (7) for scenarios where the phenotype structure is linked to the motility of
the population members but not to the rates at which they proliferate, i.e. PS-PIDE
models of form





∂tn = D(y)∇2
xn + ¯D∇2
yn + nR(ρ) ,
x ∈X , y ∈Y ,
ρ(t, x) :=
Z
Y
n(t, x, y) dy ,
(8)
have been particularly popular in the study of cane toad invasion in Australia. For
instance, considering Y ⊆R+ and thus y ≡y, a model of this type with11
D(y) := y ,
R(ρ) := r (1 −ρ)
(9)
was proposed in B´enichou et al. (2012). More recently, related models that take into
account the effect of spatial heterogeneity in the surrounding environment on the pro-
liferation rate (Lam and Lou, 2017) and motility (Zamberletti et al., 2022) of the
population members have also been considered. Over the last decade, the PS-PIDE
model (8)-(9) has received considerable attention, both from a modelling and an ana-
lytical point of view. In particular, from the modelling perspective, it has provided
a robust mechanistic explanation for spatial sorting observed in cane toad invasion:
highly motile individuals are found to reside at the edge of the invasion front (B´enichou
et al., 2012; Berestycki et al., 2015; Bouin et al., 2012; Bouin and Calvez, 2014; Tura-
nova, 2015). From the analytical standpoint, it has become a prototypical example of
PS-PIDE models that admit accelerating-front solutions (i.e. travelling-front solutions
that accelerate over time) (Berestycki et al., 2015; Bouin et al., 2012, 2017).
Moreover, when spatial dynamics are ignored, i.e. n(t, x, y) ≡n(t, y), PS-PIDE
models of form (7) reduce to the following well-investigated class of non-local PDE
11Note that the growth rate R(ρ) defined via (9) is of the logistic form (6) with k = 1. Note also that,
under the assumption Y ⊆R+, defining D via (9) translates into mathematical terms the idea that there is
a proportional relationship between the phenotype structuring variable and the motility of the individuals.
14
models of evolutionary dynamis 12





∂tn = ¯D∇2
yn + nR(y, ρ) ,
y ∈Y ,
ρ(t) :=
Z
Y
n(t, y) dy ,
(10)
where now ρ(t) is the (total) population size at time t. Models of this type have
been widely used in theoretical studies into the evolutionary dynamics of phenotype-
structured populations, for different biological contexts (Perthame, 2006). Focusing on
cell populations, a possible form of the fitness function R(y, ρ) that has been employed,
e.g. in Almeida et al. (2019); Lorenzi et al. (2016), to investigate the evolutionary
dynamics of cancer cells in spatially homogeneous scenarios is
R(y, ρ) := r(y) −κρ .
(11)
The term r(y) in (11) can be regarded as the net per capita growth rate (i.e. the
difference between the rate of proliferation and the rate of death under natural selec-
tion) of population members in the phenotypic state y. Hence the maximum points of
this function, which coincide with the maximum points of the fitness function R(y, ρ),
correspond to the fitness peaks (i.e. the peaks of the phenotypic fitness landscape of
the population) (Diekmann et al., 2005; Lorenzi and Pouchol, 2020). For example,
in scenarios where there is one single fitness peak, a possible simple definition of the
function r is
r(y) := γ −|y −φ|2 .
(12)
Here the point φ ∈Y models the phenotypic state corresponding to the fitness peak
(i.e. the fittest phenotype) and the parameter γ ∈R+
∗is linked to the maximum fit-
ness (i.e. the fitness of the fittest phenotype). Moreover, the saturating term −κρ
in (11) models the limitations on population growth imposed by carrying capacity
constraints, and the parameter κ ∈R+
∗is inversely related to the carrying capacity of
the population. Of course, when modelling the evolutionary dynamics of cell popula-
tions, alternatives to (11) can also be considered for the fitness function, as done, for
instance, in Lorz et al. (2013); Chisholm et al. (2015); Guilberteau et al. (2023).
As illustrated by the plots in Figure 5, when p = 1, and thus y ≡y and φ ≡φ,
non-local PDE models of form (10) complemented with definitions (11)-(12) admit
Gaussian-like solutions with a variance proportional to ¯D and a mean, ¯y(t), which
represents the mean or prevailing phenotype in the population at time t, that converges
to φ as t →∞(Almeida et al., 2019; Ardaˇseva et al., 2020; Chisholm et al., 2016).
This provides a possible mathematical formalisation of two key facts in evolutionary
biology: the rate at which individuals undergo phenotypic changes, ¯D, impacts on
the phenotypic variance (i.e. the level of phenotypic heterogeneity) of the population;
12It is common to refer to non-local PDE models of form (10) as mutation-selection models (e.g.
see Lorenzi and Pouchol 2020) or replicator-mutator equations (e.g. see Alfaro and Veruete 2019) or Lotka-
Volterra parabolic equations (e.g. see Perthame and Barles 2008). On the other hand, when R(y, ρ) ≡R(ρ)
with R(ρ) of form (6) or of a related form, non-local PDE models of this type are usually referred to as
non-local Fisher-KPP equation (e.g. see Berestycki et al. 2009), since they can be regarded as a non-local
version of the Fisher-KPP model (5)-(6). However, note that in the literature the term non-local Fisher-KPP
equation is sometimes used, by extension, to refer to PS-PIDE models of form (10) as well.
15
Fig. 5 Illustration of Gaussian-like solutions and concentration phenomena from a non-
local PDE model of evolutionary dynamics. Illustrative output of the non-local PDE model
of evolutionary dynamics (10)-(12), with y ≡y ∈[−5, 5], subject to zero-flux boundary conditions.
In particular, Gaussian-like solutions and concentration phenomena are shown for the rescaled non-
local PDE (35), under definitions (11)-(12) (with κ = 0.1, γ = 10, and φ = 1), subject to initial
condition (37) (with ρ0 = 60 and ¯y0 = −1). Simulations are for (a) ε = 1, (b) ε = 0.1, and (c)
ε = 0.01. Top panels display the dynamics of the rescaled phenotype density n(t, y)/ρ(t); bottom
panels display the phenotype density n(t, y) (red solid line) at select times. We compare the numerical
solution with the analytically predicted one (black dashed lines) – i.e. the Gaussian-like solution (38)
with mean ¯yε(t) and weight ρε(t) obtained by solving numerically the Cauchy problem (39). We see
the solution to be of a Gaussian form, which becomes concentrated as a weighted increasingly sharp
Gaussian as ε gets smaller, corroborating the emergence of concentration phenomena of type (40).
We see also that the mean or prevailing phenotype ¯y(t) converges to y = φ (black dashed lines, top
panels) as t →∞, corresponding to selection of the fittest trait.
and the mean or prevailing phenotype in the population will ultimately be the fittest
phenotype φ. Moreover, as discussed in detail in Section 4.2.2 and as illustrated again
by Figure 5, appropriately rescaled versions of these models can exhibit concentration
phenomena – i.e. their solutions can become concentrated as weighted infinitely sharp
Gaussians, that is, weighted Dirac masses – formalising in mathematical terms the
idea that the population shows only one trait, and thus remains monomorphic over
time (Diekmann et al., 2005; Perthame, 2006). We note that other forms of explicit and
semi-explicit solutions to variants of the non-local PDE (10) have also been obtained
(e.g. see Alfaro and Carles 2014, 2017) and cases where there are multiple fitness peaks
have also been analytically investigated (e.g. see Alfaro and Veruete 2019; Lorenzi and
Pouchol 2020).
Finally, for a spatially heterogeneous environment – for example a population sur-
rounded by non-uniformly distributed abiotic factors (nutrients, therapeutic agents,
etc for cell populations) that impact on proliferation and death rates – a natural
extension of PS-PIDE models of form (7) is





∂tn = D(y)∇2
xn + ¯D∇2
yn + nR(y, ρ, S) ,
x ∈X , y ∈Y ,
ρ(t, x) :=
Z
Y
n(t, x, y) dy .
(13)
16
Here the vector S(t, x) = (S1(t, x), . . . , SN(t, x)) represents the concentrations at
position x at time t of N different abiotic factors, whose dynamics are governed by
appropriate evolution equations coupled with the PS-PIDE (13). In this more general
context, definitions (11)-(12) can be modified, respectively, as
R(y, ρ, S) := r(y, S) −κρ
(14)
and
r(y, S) := g(S) −|y −f(S)|2 ,
(15)
where f : RN →Y models the fittest phenotype under the selective pressure of the
local environmental conditions, which are determined by the concentrations of the
different abiotic factors, and g : RN →R+
∗is related to the corresponding maximum
fitness.
Starting from Lorz et al. (2015), where a PS-PIDE model of form (13) with
D(y) ≡0 and ¯D = 0 was proposed to study the emergence of cell phenotypic het-
erogeneity in avascular tumours, models that can be regarded as variations on the
theme of (13) have found application in a number of theoretical studies on the eco-
evolutionary dynamics of cancer cells in avascular and vascularised tumours – e.g.
see Celora et al. (2023); Chiari et al. (2023b,a); Fiandaca et al. (2021); Lorenzi et al.
(2018); Villa et al. (2021a,b). Variants of (13) with D(y) ≡D have also received
attention from the mathematical community as a mean to investigate analytically
evolutionary dynamics in phenotype-structured populations exposed to shifting envi-
ronments (Alfaro et al. 2013, 2017; Berestycki and Chapuisat 2013) and spatially
periodic environments (Boutillon and Rossi, 2024).
3.2 Pressure-based movement models
Diffusion-based models of cell movement implicitly rely on the assumption that cell
motion is undirected. However, cells, especially eukaryotic cells, can have a tendency
to move towards regions where they feel less compressed (Byrne and Preziosi, 2003;
Byrne and Chaplain, 1997). This aspect of cell movement, which is central to a vari-
ety of physiological and pathological processes – encompassing tissue development,
wound healing, and avascular tumour growth – can be captured by pressure-based
models (Roose et al., 2007). Building on the ideas presented in the seminal paper by
Greenspan (1976) and subsequent papers (Ambrosi and Preziosi, 2002; Bresch et al.,
2010; Byrne and Drasdo, 2009; Byrne and Preziosi, 2003; Byrne and Chaplain, 1997;
Ciarletta et al., 2011; Lowengrub et al., 2009; Preziosi and Tosin, 2009; Sherratt and
Chaplain, 2001), the basic tenet of these models is that cell movement is described via
an advective term with an advective velocity inversely proportional to the gradient of
the cellular pressure, P(t, x). This leads to a PDE of the following form, which can
be obtained from (1) by taking Dx ≡0, Ax := −µ∇xP, and F := ρR(P):



∂tρ = ∇x · [µ ρ∇xP] + ρR(P) ,
x ∈X ,
P(t, x) := Π[ρ](t, x) .
(16)
17
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
2
4
6
8
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
5
10
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
2
4
6
8
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
5
10
0
5
10
15
20
25
Fig. 6 Illustration of phenotypic structuring across travelling waves from a PS-PIDE
model of pressure-based movement. Illustrative outputs of (b) a PS-PIDE model of pressure-
based movement of form (17) and (a) a corresponding ABM of the type presented in Section 4.1.1.
In particular, phenotypic structuring across travelling waves is shown for the rescaled PS-PIDE (57)
with ε = 0.01 and the corresponding rescaled ABM. Here, we consider one dimension in each of
physical and phenotype space, such that x ≡x ∈[0, 25] and y ≡y ∈[0, 1]. Zero-flux conditions are
imposed at the boundaries. These results are for a go-or-grow type scenario, where the phenotypic
state y ∈[0, 1] is such that y close to 0 corresponds to high proliferation rate and low mobility
coefficient, while y close to 1 corresponds to low proliferation rate and high mobility coefficient. We
see an invasion process in which a travelling wave of cells progresses, and there is a good agreement
between the results of numerical simulations of the ABM, numerical solutions of the PS-PIDE model,
and analytical predictions (right panels); cells with a higher mobility coefficient are concentrated to
the front of the wave, and cells with a higher proliferation rate dominate the rear (left panels). The
insets of the right panels display the plots of the points x1(t), x2(t), and x3(t) such that ρ(t, x1(t)) =
0.2ρM, ρ(t, x2(t)) = 0.5ρM, and ρ(t, x3(t)) = 0.8ρM, where ρM ∈R+
∗is the maximum value of the
cell density. Notably, we observe the evolution of x1(t), x2(t), and x3(t) towards straight lines of
approximately the same slope, and the slope agrees with analytical predictions on the wave speed.
This indicates that there is evolution towards a travelling wave with a wave speed consistent with
analytical predictions. For full details of the models and parametrisation, we refer to Macfarlane et al.
(2022): this figure corresponds to Figure 2 of Macfarlane et al. (2022).
In (16), the function Π(ρ) represents a constitutive law (i.e. a barotropic relation) for
the cellular pressure as a function of the cell density (i.e. the cell volume fraction),
which is needed to close the PDE for ρ (Ambrosi and Preziosi, 2002). In analogy with
Darcy’s law for fluid flow in porous media (Darcy, 1856), the parameter µ ∈R+
∗is
usually referred to as the cell mobility coefficient. This is inversely proportional to the
permeability of the medium in which the cells are embedded (e.g. the extracellular
matrix) and depends on the cells’ morphological and mechanical properties (e.g. cell
elongation and nucleus deformability). Here µ is taken to be constant but it may also
be a function of x and t due to the presence of inhomogeneities and anisotropicities, as
18
well as the occurrence of temporal changes, in the embedding medium that surrounds
the cells.
The growth rate of the cell density, R, depends on P to incorporate pressure-
dependent inhibition of growth (i.e. cessation of cell division when cellular pressure
becomes too high) (Drasdo and Hoehme, 2012; Ranft et al., 2010). Note that, if the
growth of the cell population is not only pressure-regulated but also nutrient-limited,
then the growth rate would also depend on the nutrient concentration, and an addi-
tional PDE for the nutrient concentration would be introduced. Models of form (16)
– and related variants for multiple cell populations – have drawn interest from math-
ematicians and physicists for their ability to recapitulate key aspects of tumour and
tissue growth and for exhibiting travelling waves which display interesting features –
e.g. see Bertsch et al. (2015); Chaplain et al. (2020); Lorenzi et al. (2017); Tang et al.
(2014).
Note also that when one takes Π(ρ) := Kρ, where K ∈R+
∗is a scale factor (which
for simplicity can be set as 1), the transport term in the PDE (16) models more
specifically the tendency of cells to disperse to avoid crowding (i.e. to move down the
gradient of the cell density ρ) (Chaplain et al., 2006), while the reaction term takes
into account density-dependent inhibition of growth (Lieberman and Glaser, 1981).
Moreover, as discussed in Perthame et al. (2014), when Π(ρ) := Kγ
 ρ
γ, where the
parameter γ ∈R+
∗with γ > 1 provides a measure of the stiffness of the pressure law
and Kγ ∈R+
∗is a scale factor, the PDE (16) takes the form of a porous medium-
type equation. In this case, considering the asymptotic regime γ →∞13, from the
PDE (16) one can derive a free-boundary problem of Hele-Shaw type, as demonstrated
in Perthame et al. (2014), thus forming a bridge between PDE models of form (16)
and mathematical models formulated as free-boundary problems, which have been
widely employed to describe related biological processes (Friedman, 2015). This is also
an aspect that has received increasing attention from the mathematical community –
see e.g. Bubba et al. (2020); David and Schmidtchen (2024); Kim et al. (2016); Mellet
et al. (2017).
Generalisations of PDE models of form (16) into PS-PIDE models of form





∂tn = ∇x · [µ(y)n∇xP] + ¯D∇2
yn + nR(y, P) ,
x ∈X , y ∈Y ,
P(t, x) := Π[ρ](t, x), ρ(t, x) :=
Z
Y
n(t, x, y) dy
(17)
have been proposed for the situation in which both the rate of proliferation and the
mobility coefficient of the cells depend on the phenotypic state y. Specifically, a PS-
PIDE model of this form with Π(ρ) := ρ has been proposed in Lorenzi et al. (2022),
while different possible definitions of Π(ρ) have been considered in Macfarlane et al.
(2022). PS-PIDE models of type (17) can be obtained from (2) by taking Dx ≡0
and Ax := −µ(y)∇xP along with F := nR(y, P), Ay ≡0, and Dy ≡¯D. Here the
function µ(y) is the mobility coefficient of cells in the phenotypic state y. Furthermore,
13Since the parameter γ provides a measure of the stiffness of the pressure law Π(ρ), the limiting
regime γ →∞is usually referred to as ‘incompressible limit’, because it corresponds to mathematically
approximating cells as an incompressible fluid.
19
the function R(y, P) models the net proliferation rate of cells in the phenotypic state
y under the local environmental conditions corresponding to the cellular pressure P,
and can thus be regarded as a fitness function. This can be defined along the lines
of (11) as
R(y, P) := r(y) −κP ,
(18)
where the parameter κ ∈R+
∗is now linked to the critical value of the cellular pressure
above which cessation of cell division occurs.
In Lorenzi et al. (2022); Macfarlane et al. (2022), considering ‘go-or-grow’ type
scenarios in which fast proliferating cells are less migratory (i.e. they have a lower
mobility coefficient) and vice versa, it was shown that PS-PIDEs of form (17) can pro-
duce phenotype-structured travelling waves whereby fast proliferating cells make up
the bulk of the population in the rear of the wave, while highly migratory cells drive
invasion at the edge of the wave front (see Figure 6). Focusing on the case where all
cells in the population have the same mobility coefficient regardless of their pheno-
typic state (i.e. when µ(y) ≡µ), connections between PS-PIDE models of this type
and free boundary problems of Hele-Shaw type have been explored in David (2023),
while related models have been employed to investigate the emergence of resistance to
chemotherapy alongside tumour growth in Cho and Levy (2018). Moreover, extensions
of (17) have been considered in Fiandaca et al. (2022) to model the growth of avas-
cular tumours, taking into account tumour necrosis and tumour-microenvironment
interactions.
3.3 Taxis-based movement models
In processes that include morphogenesis, wound healing, and inflammation, cell popu-
lations need to be correctly positioned. Taxis-based14 models form a third major class
of movement models, describing situations in which a cell (or organism) is directed to
move in a particular direction. Chemotaxis, the directed movement of cells up or down
gradients of (usually soluble) molecules, has been the most intensely studied form
of taxis behaviour, but a wide variety of others have also been investigated, includ-
ing movement in response to adhesion gradients (haptotaxis, Carter 1965), stiffness
(durotaxis, Lo et al. 2000), and electric fields (galvanotaxis, Erickson and Nuccitelli
1984).
The most well-known PDE model for describing chemotaxis movements is the
Keller-Segel system (Keller and Segel, 1970, 1971b,a; Patlak, 1953). This model has
received significant attention as a model for chemotaxis (Horstmann, 2003; Tindall
et al., 2008; Hillen and Painter, 2009; Bellomo et al., 2015; Painter, 2019; Aru-
mugam and Tyagi, 2021): from the modelling community for its ability to recapitulate
macroscopic dynamics of chemotactic populations, including travelling waves and
self-organisation, and from the mathematical community for its intricate analytical
properties. Moreover, it has provided an important base for describing other forms
of taxis behaviour, with its adaption to describe haptotaxis a particularly promi-
nent example (Wang, 2020; Sfakianakis and Chaplain, 2020). In its standard form,
14The word taxis stems from the ancient Greek ταξισ, meaning ‘to steer’, and was adopted by Wiliam
Pfeffer to describe a hypothetical steering of microorganisms, following observations of their reorganisation
according to chemicals and light (Pfeffer, 1884).
20
Fig. 7
Illustration of phenotypic structuring across travelling waves from a PS-PIDE
model of chemotaxis-based movement. Illustrative outputs of a PS-PIDE model of chemotaxis-
based movement of form (20). In particular, phenotypic structuring across travelling waves is shown
for the rescaled PS-PIDE (56) with ε = 0.01 coupled with an appropriate evolution equation for the
attractant concentration, S. Here, we consider one dimension in each of physical and phenotype space,
such that x ≡x ∈[0, 20] and y ≡y ∈[0, 1]. Zero-flux conditions are imposed at the boundaries.
(a) Chemotaxis-proliferation trade-off, where the phenotypic state y ∈[0, 1] is such that y close to 0
corresponds to high proliferation rate and low chemotactic sensitivity, while y close to 1 corresponds
to low proliferation rate and high chemotactic sensitivity. All cells equally degrade the attractant. We
see an invasion process in which as the wave progresses, nutrient is degraded (left panel); the most
efficient chemotaxers are concentrated to the front of the wave, and strong proliferators dominate the
rear (middle panel); the numerically estimated wavespeed agrees with analytical predictions (right
panel). (b) Chemotaxis-proliferation trade-off for a nutrient-like attractant, i.e. an attractant that
impacts on the proliferation rate. The phenotypic state y ∈[0, 1] is again such that y close to 0
corresponds to high proliferation rate but low chemotactic sensitivity, while y close to 1 corresponds
to low proliferation rate and high chemotactic sensitivity. We see a pulse waveform for the population
(left panel); as in (a), strongly (weakly) chemotactic cells are concentrated to the front (rear) of
the wave (middle panel); numerically estimated wavespeed agrees with analytical predictions (right
panel). For full details of the model and parametrisation, we refer to Lorenzi et al. (2022): panel (a)
corresponds to Figure 3A and panel (b) corresponds to Figure 5B of Lorenzi et al. (2022), respectively.
(chemo)taxis is described via an advective term with an advective velocity propor-
tional to the gradient of a (chemical) signal, S(t, x). Along with standard choices of
an additional linear diffusion component (i.e. similarly to what done in (5)) and a
growth term, one sets Dx ≡D, Ax := χ∇xS, and F := ρR(ρ, S) in (1) to obtain
∂tρ = ∇x · [D∇xρ −χρ∇xS] + ρR(ρ, S) ,
x ∈X .
(19)
The parameter χ ∈R+
∗is usually referred to as the chemotactic sensitivity – here
it is taken to be a constant, but it can be chosen to depend on the signal S and/or
the density ρ (Hillen and Painter, 2009). Note that the growth rate may depend on
the signal, as it is the case in the PDE (19), for example if this represents a nutrient
that fuels proliferation. In many models, also the dynamics of S(t, x) will be governed
by some PDE, leading to a system of coupled PDEs. Such couplings are crucial in
the context of pattern formation phenomena, where feedback between chemotaxis and
signal production leads to self organisation (Keller and Segel, 1970) and travelling wave
21
dynamics, where signal degradation by cells can generate propagating waves (Keller
and Segel, 1971b).
An extension of (19) to a PS-PIDE model for chemotaxis has been proposed in
Lorenzi and Painter (2022), focusing on the case where phenotype regulates both
proliferation and chemotaxis. One can arrive at this form of model through extending
to a phenotype density n(t, x, y) and – with the same earlier choice of linear diffusion
in phenotype (i.e. taking Ay ≡0 and Dy ≡¯D in (2)) – obtaining the following
PS-PIDE formulation of (19):





∂tn = ∇x · [D∇xn −χ(y)n∇xS] + ¯D∇2
yn + nR(y, ρ, S) , x ∈X , y ∈Y ,
ρ(t, x) :=
Z
Y
n(t, x, y) dy .
(20)
In the above model, each of the chemotactic sensitivity and growth rate now depend on
the phenotypic state – i.e. the function χ(y) models the chemotactic sensitivity of cells
in the phenotypic state y, while the function R(y, ρ, S) is the net proliferation rate (i.e.
the fitness) of cells in the phenotypic state y under the local environmental conditions
corresponding to the cell density ρ and the signal S, which can for example be defined
via (14) with S ≡S. Experimental studies with microfluidic T-mazes have revealed
that bacterial populations can be structured according to their chemotactic sensitivity
(Salek et al. 2019, see Figure 1 (b)), while other studies have suggested that resource
allocation can lead to a trade-off between investment in motility and growth (Ni et al.,
2020). Consequently, the case of a ‘proliferation-chemotaxis’ trade-off – that is, faster
proliferators are less chemotactic (i.e. they have a lower chemotactic sensitivity) and
vice versa – was considered in Lorenzi and Painter (2022), where it was demonstrated
that PS-PIDEs of form (20) coupled with an appropriate evolution equation for S can
form travelling waves that exhibit phenotypic structuring (see Figure 7).
Of course, one can consider a number of further variations. For instance, letting
S model the density of the extracellular matrix, PS-PIDEs of form (20) have been
employed to describe cancer cell dynamics in phenotype-structured haptotaxis mod-
els of tumour invasion (Fiandaca et al., 2022; Lorenzi et al., 2023). Related PS-PIDE
models of cell migration, where S is replaced by a vector S whose components model
the concentrations of different diffusible molecules, have been considered in Hodgkin-
son et al. (2018). Variants of PS-PIDEs of form (20), wherein a phenotypic structure
is included in the growth term but not in the term modelling cellular taxis, have
been used in models for cell migration (Domschke et al., 2017) and tumour cell
invasion (Engwer et al., 2017; Hodgkinson et al., 2018, 2019).
PS-PIDE models closely related to (20) have also been elegantly deployed along-
side experiments, to investigate how phenotype structuring drives collective behaviour
within travelling E. coli bands (Fu et al., 2018; Mattingly and Emonet, 2022; Phan
et al., 2024). In these models, the structuring describes a bacterium’s tumbling bias
and manifests in phenotype dependency for both cell diffusion, Dx := D(y), and
chemotactic sensitivity, χ(y). These models assume that bacteria do not alter phe-
notype within their lifetime (i.e. Ay ≡0 and Dy ≡0 in (2)), but can as a result of
22
division, an aspect that is included in the model via a kernel that stipulates how divi-
sion of a parent cell with one phenotype leads to progeny cells with other phenotypes.
This leads to a non-local form of the term F in (2) that depends on the phenotype
structuring. Direct comparisons of this model with data have revealed the limita-
tions of ‘traditional’ non-structured models and gained insights into how an evolving
structuring may allow populations to efficiently colonise heterogeneous environments.
4 Mathematical tools and techniques
In this section, we provide a concise overview of mathematical tools and techniques
that have been developed and deployed to: derive PS-PIDE models of form (2) from
agent-based models for the spatial spread and evolutionary dynamics of phenotype-
structured cell populations (Section 4.1); analyse the qualitative properties of the
solutions to such PS-PIDE models (Section 4.2); and construct numerical solutions of
these models (Section 4.3).
For simplicity, we now restrict to one-dimensional physical and phenotypic domains
– i.e. the case where x ≡x ∈X ⊆R and y ≡y ∈Y ⊆R. Throughout this section, we
will let ε ∈R+
∗be a small parameter, and use the notation δa(y) for the Dirac delta
centred at y = a.
4.1 Tools and techniques to derive PS-PIDE models from
agent-based models
Instead of defining a PS-PIDE model of type (2) on the basis of population-scale
phenomenological assumptions, it can be desirable to first postulate an ABM that
tracks the spatial and evolutionary dynamics of individual cells, and then employ
limiting procedures to derive the corresponding PS-PIDE model (Drasdo, 2005). In this
way, the population-level terms that comprise the PS-PIDE can be formally linked to
explicit assumptions for the cellular processes that drive the dynamics at the single-cell
level.
A range of approaches have been advanced and adopted in recent decades for
transitioning between ABMs and PS-PIDE models which describe simultaneously the
spatial spread and evolutionary dynamics of phenotype-structured populations. These
include probabilistic methods to derive PS-PIDE models as the limit of corresponding
off-lattice ABMs when the number of individuals in the population tends to infinity
(see e.g. Andrade-Restrepo et al. 2019; Champagnat and M´el´eard 2007; Fontbona and
M´el´eard 2015; Leman 2016), and formal limiting procedures to derive PS-PIDE models
from on-lattice ABMs when the lattice parameters tend to zero (see e.g. Macfarlane
et al. 2022; Lorenzi et al. 2023). As a further note, structuring variables have also been
incorporated into ‘mesoscale’ kinetic equations, which can also be scaled to a PDE
form (see e.g. Erban and Othmer 2004; Engwer et al. 2015); we are, however, unaware
of any such derivations that lead explicitly to the PS-PIDE form (2).
In the spirit of a tutorial-style example, here we formally derive a PS-PIDE model
of form (2), starting from an ABM for the spatial spread and evolutionary dynamics
of phenotype-structured cell populations (see Section 4.1.2). In this model, single cells
undergo spatial movement, phenotypic changes, and proliferation and death according
23
to a set of rules which correspond to a discrete-time branching random walk over
a two-dimensional lattice (Hughes, 1996), which represents one-dimensional physical
and phenotypic domains (see Section 4.1.1). Note that here we will exemplify key
ideas considering the case of unbounded domains, but both the governing rules for
the dynamics of single cells in the ABM and the procedure employed to derive the
corresponding PS-PIDE can easily be adapted to the case of bounded domains.
4.1.1 An agent-based model for spatial spread and evolutionary
dynamics of phenotype-structured cell populations
Setup of the model and notation
The time variable t ∈R+ and the space variable x ∈R are discretised, respectively, as
tk = k τ and xi = ihx, with k ∈N0 := N∪{0}, τ ∈R+
∗, i ∈Z, and hx ∈R+
∗. Moreover,
the phenotype variable y ∈R is discretised via yj = jhy, with j ∈Z and hy ∈R+
∗.
Here, τ, hx, and hy are the time-step, space-step, and phenotype-step, respectively.
Each individual cell is represented as an agent that occupies a position on the
lattice {xi}i∈Z × {yj}j∈Z and we introduce the dependent variable N k
i,j ∈N0 to model
the number of cells in the phenotypic state yj at position xi at time tk. The cell
phenotype density and the corresponding cell density are then defined, respectively, as
n(tk, xi, yj) ≡nk
i,j := N k
i,j
hxhy
,
ρ(tk, xi) ≡ρk
i := hy
X
j
nk
i,j.
(21)
The modelling strategies adopted here to describe spatial movement, phenotypic
changes, and proliferation and death of individual cells are summarised below.
Modelling spatial movement of individual cells
Cell movement is modelled as a random walk along the spatial dimension. For a focal
cell in the phenotypic state yj at spatial position xi at time tk, the probability of
moving left (i.e. to move to spatial position xi−1) is P L
x (tk, xi, yj), the probability of
moving right (i.e. to move to spatial position xi+1) is P R
x (tk, xi, yj), and the probability
of not moving (i.e. to remain stationary at position xi) is then P S
x (tk, xi, yj) = 1 −
P R
x (tk, xi, yj) −P L
x (tk, xi, yj). Here, P L
x and P R
x are non-negative real functions such
that P L
x (tk, xi, yj) + P R
x (tk, xi, yj) ≤1 for all (tk, xi, yj) ∈R+ × R × R.
Modelling phenotypic changes of individual cells
Phenotypic changes are incorporated into the model by allowing cells to update
their phenotypic state according to a random walk along the phenotypic dimen-
sion. For a focal cell in the phenotypic state yj at spatial position xi at time tk,
the probability of entering the phenotypic state yj−1 is P L
y (tk, xi, yj), the proba-
bility of entering the phenotypic state yj+1 is P R
y (tk, xi, yj), and the probability
of not undergoing phenotypic changes (i.e. remain in the phenotypic state yj) is
P S
y (tk, xi, yj) = 1 −P R
y (tk, xi, yj) −P L
y (tk, xi, yj). To reduce the amount of calcula-
tions in the derivation of the corresponding PS-PIDE model, we focus on the case
where cells in the population undergo phenotypic changes with a constant probability,
24
and thus we assume P L
y (tk, xi, yj) ≡pL
y ∈R+ and P R
y (tk, xi, yj) ≡pR
y ∈R+, which
imply P S
y (tk, xi, yj) ≡pS
y = 1 −pR
y −pL
y , with the parameters pL
y and pR
y such that
pL
y + pR
y ≤1.
Modelling proliferation and death of individual cells
Cell proliferation is modelled by letting a dividing cell be instantly replaced by two
identical progeny cells that inherit the spatial position and phenotypic state of the
parent cell. Conversely, a cell undergoing death is instantly removed from the popula-
tion. Focusing on a scenario wherein the cell population undergoes density-dependent
inhibition of growth, the probabilities of cell proliferation and death are assumed here
to also depend on the cell density. Hence, a focal cell in the phenotypic state yj at spa-
tial position xi at time tk will proliferate with probability P P (tk, xi, yj, ρk
i ), die with
probability P D(tk, xi, yj, ρk
i ), or remain quiescent (i.e neither proliferate nor die) with
probability P Q(tk, xi, yj, ρk
i ) = 1−P P (tk, xi, yj, ρk
i ) −P D(tk, xi, yj, ρk
i ). In particular,
modelling the rate of cell proliferation and the rate of cell death through the functions
rP and rD, respectively, we use the following definitions
P P (tk, xi, yj, ρk
i ) := τ rP (tk, xi, yj, ρk
i ) ,
P D(tk, xi, yj, ρk
i ) := τ rD(tk, xi, yj, ρk
i ) ,
(22)
under the additional assumption that the time-step τ is sufficiently small so that
P P (tk, xi, yj, ρk
i ) + P D(tk, xi, yj, ρk
i ) ≤1 for all (tk, xi, yj, ρk
i ) ∈R+ × R × R × R+.
4.1.2 Formal derivation of the corresponding PS-PIDE model
Assuming the time-step, τ, the space-step, hx, and the phenotype-step, hy, to be
sufficiently small, we formally take t := tk, x := xi, y := yj, and thus tk+1 :=
t + τ, xi±1 := x ± hx, yj±1 := y ± hy, and n(tk, xi, yj) := n(t, x, y). Furthermore,
recalling that ρ(tk, xi) is defined via (21), we also formally take ρ(tk, xi) := ρ(t, x)
with ρ(t, x) :=
Z
R
n(t, x, y) dy. Then, when the dynamics of single cells are governed
by the rules summarised above, under the simplifying assumption that the events
underlying spatial movement, phenotypic changes, and cell proliferation and death are
independent, the principle of mass balance formally gives the following equation
n(t + τ, x, y) =

2 P P (t, x, y, ρ(t, x)) + P Q(t, x, y, ρ(t, x))

×
×
n
pS
y P S
x (t, x, y) n(t, x, y) +
+pL
y P S
x (t, x, y + hy) n(t, x, y + hy) + pR
y P S
x (t, x, y −hy) n(t, x, y −hy) +
+pS
y
h
P R
x (t, x −hx, y) n(t, x −hx, y) + P L
x (t, x + hx, y) n(t, x + hx, y)
i
+
+pL
y
h
P R
x (t, x −hx, y + hy) n(t, x −hx, y + hy) +
+ P L
x (t, x + hx, y + hy) n(t, x + hx, y + hy)
i
+pR
y
h
P R
x (t, x −hx, y −hy) n(t, x −hx, y −hy) +
+ P L
x (t, x + hx, y −hy) n(t, x + hx, y −hy)
io
.
25
When the probabilities of cell proliferation and death are defined via (22), using the
fact that P Q(t, x, y, ρ(t, x)) = 1 −P P (t, x, y, ρ(t, x)) −P D(t, x, y, ρ(t, x)), we have
2 P P (t, x, y, ρ(t, x)) + P Q(t, x, y, ρ(t, x)) = 1 + τ

rP (t, x, y, ρ(t, x)) −rD(t, x, y, ρ(t, x))

.
Hence, introducing the following definition of the net cell proliferation rate (i.e. the
difference between the rate of cell proliferation and the rate of cell death)
R(t, x, y, ρ) := rP (t, x, y, ρ) −rD(t, x, y, ρ) ,
rewriting ρ(t, x) as ρ for brevity, and using the fact that P S
x (t, x, y) = 1−P R
x (t, x, y)−
P L
x (t, x, y) and pS
y = 1 −pR
y −pL
y , the above equation can be rewritten as
n(t + τ, x, y) =

1 + τ R(t, x, y, ρ)

×
×
n 
1 −pR
y −pL
y
 
1 −P R
x (t, x, y) −P L
x (t, x, y)

n(t, x, y) +
+pL
y

1 −P R
x (t, x, y + hy) −P L
x (t, x, y + hy)

n(t, x, y + hy) +
+pR
y

1 −P R
x (t, x, y −hy) −P L
x (t, x, y −hy)

n(t, x, y −hy) +
+

1 −pR
y −pL
y
 h
P R
x (t, x −hx, y) n(t, x −hx, y) +
+ P L
x (t, x + hx, y) n(t, x + hx, y)
i
+
+pL
y
h
P R
x (t, x −hx, y + hy) n(t, x −hx, y + hy) +
+ P L
x (t, x + hx, y + hy) n(t, x + hx, y + hy)
i
+pR
y
h
P R
x (t, x −hx, y −hy) n(t, x −hx, y −hy) +
+ P L
x (t, x + hx, y −hy) n(t, x + hx, y −hy)
io
.
Provided that the functions P R
x (t, x, y), P L
x (t, x, y), and n(t, x, y) are sufficiently reg-
ular, one can substitute the first-order Taylor polynomial for n(t + τ, x, y) and the
second-order Taylor polynomials for the other terms into the above equation. Dropping
(t, x, y) for brevity, after some simple (but tedious) calculations we find the following
equation for the cell phenotype density n
∂tn = R(t, x, y, ρ) n +
+∂x

n
hx
τ

P L
x −P R
x

+ h2x
2τ ∂x

P L
x + P R
x

+ h2x
2τ

P L
x + P R
x

∂xn

+
+ hy
τ

pL
y −pR
y

∂yn + h2y
2τ

pL
y + pR
y

∂2
yyn +
+ hxhy
τ

pL
y −pR
y

∂2
xy
h
P L
x −P R
x

n
i
+ h.o.t. ,
(23)
where higher order terms in τ, hx, and hy have been grouped into h.o.t. . If the
functions P L
x and P R
x and the parameters pL
y and pR
y are also such that the following
relations hold as hx →0 and hy →0
P L
x (t, x, y) −P R
x (t, x, y) = hx
2 Ψx(t, x, y) + O(h2
x) ,
Ψx : [0, ∞) × R × R →R ,
26
P L
x (t, x, y) + P R
x (t, x, y) = Φx(t, x, y) + O(hx) ,
Φx : [0, ∞) × R × R →R+ ,
and
pL
y −pR
y = hy
2 ψy + O(h2
y) ,
pL
y + pR
y = ϕy + O(hy) ,
ψy ∈R , ϕy ∈R+ ,
where Ψx and Φx are sufficiently regular functions, then letting τ →0, hx →0, and
hy →0 in such a way that
h2
x
2τ →αx ∈R+
∗,
h2
y
2τ →αy ∈R+
∗,
from equation (23) we formally obtain the following equation
∂tn = R(t, x, y, ρ) n + ∂x [n αx (Ψx(t, x, y) + ∂xΦx(t, x, y))] +
+∂x [αx Φx(t, x, y)∂xn] + αy ψy∂yn + αy ϕy ∂2
yyn .
Introducing the definitions
Ax(t, x, y) := −αx (Ψx(t, x, y) + ∂xΦx(t, x, y)) ,
Dx(t, x, y) := αx Φx(t, x, y) ,
and
¯A := −αy ψy ,
¯D := αy ϕy ,
and recalling the definition of ρ(t, x) given above, from the latter equation we find the
following PS-PIDE model





∂tn + ∂x [Ax(t, x, y) n −Dx(t, x, y) ∂xn] + ∂y
 ¯A n −¯D ∂yn

= n R(t, x, y, ρ) ,
ρ(t, x) :=
Z
R
n(t, x, y) dy ,
which is of the form of the PS-PIDE model (2), posed on a one-dimensional physical
and phenotype domain, with
Ay(t, x, y) ≡¯A ,
Dy(t, x, y) ≡¯D ,
F(t, x, y) := n(t, x, y) R(t, x, y, ρ(t, x)) .
Under different definitions of the functions Ψx(t, x, y) and Φx(t, x, y), we can derive
many of the models stated previously in Section 3, including:
• the case where
Ψx(t, x, y) ≡0 ,
Φx(t, x, y) ≡Φx(y) := ˆD(y) ,
from which, defining D(y) := αx ˆD(y) and taking also R(t, x, y, ρ) ≡R(y, ρ), we
obtain a PS-PIDE of form (7);
27
• the case where
Ψx(t, x, y) := −ˆµ(y) ∂xP(t, x),
Φx(t, x, y) ≡0 ,
P(t, x) := Π[ρ](t, x) ,
from which, defining µ(y) := αxˆµ(y) and taking R(t, x, y, ρ) ≡R(y, Π[ρ]) ≡R(y, P),
we obtain a PS-PIDE of form (17);
• the case where
Ψx(t, x, y) := ˆχ(y) ∂xS(t, x) ,
Φx(t, x, y) ≡ˆD ,
from which, defining χ(y) := αx ˆχ(y) and D := αx ˆD, and taking also R(t, x, y, ρ) ≡
R(y, ρ, S(t, x)), we obtain a PS-PIDE of form (20).
As a concluding remark we note that an excellent agreement can be found between
the outputs of the ABM and the solutions of the corresponding PS-PIDE model, if
the functions and parameters of the ABM are such that the conditions underlying the
formal derivation carried out here are satisfied; an example is provided by the com-
parison between the plots in Figure 6(a) and Figure 6(b). This holds, in particular,
when sufficiently large cell populations are considered. Then, demographic stochastic-
ity (which cannot be captured by PS-PIDE models) does not play a dominant role in
the ABM’s cell dynamics.
4.2 Tools and techniques to analyse PS-PIDE models
In the last decade, considerable attention has been directed towards analysing the
behaviour of the solutions to PS-PIDE models of type (2), with particular emphasis
on travelling waves and concentration phenomena. Referring back to Figures 6 and 7
– which display the results of numerical simulations of appropriately rescaled versions
of the PS-PIDEs (17) and (20) – we can see phenotypic structuring across travel-
ling waves as a result of the interplay between these two characteristic features: the
cell densities ρ(t, x) corresponding to solutions to these models behave like travelling
waves (Figure 6(b), right panel and Figure 7, middle panels); within these waves, a
concentration phenomenon occurs, with the phenotype density n(t, x, y) being con-
centrated into a different phenotypic state y at different spatial positions x across the
wave (Figure 6(b), left panel and Figure 7, left panels).
The obtained results, as well as the tools and techniques through which these
results have been realised, build upon the mathematical literature on related PDE
and non-local PDE models. Therefore, in order to make this section (to an extent)
self-contained, before reaching PS-PIDE models (in Section 4.2.3), we first recall
the essentials of travelling waves in PDE models of spatial spread dynamics (in
Section 4.2.1) and concentration phenomena in non-local PDE models of evolution-
ary dynamics (in Section 4.2.2), taking the PDE (5) and the non-local PDE (10) as
prototypical examples, respectively.
28
4.2.1 Travelling waves in PDE models of spatial spread dynamics
When exploring spatial spread dynamics through PDE models of type (1) with x ∈R,
one is often led to study travelling waves, which are solutions that propagate without a
change in shape and at a constant speed c ∈R (see Figure 3), and are thus of the form
ρ(t, x) ≡ρ(z) ,
z = x −c t ,
z ∈(−∞, ∞) .
(24)
In particular, focusing on travelling waves which propagate to the right, we take c ∈
R+
∗. Investigating whether the model admits travelling wave solutions then amounts to
proving the existence of pairs (ρ(z), c), such that ρ : (−∞, ∞) →R+
∗satisfies the ODE
obtained by substituting (24) into the PDE for ρ(t, x), subject to suitable boundary
conditions at z = −∞and/or z = ∞, for some c ∈R+
∗.
For instance, substituting (24) into the Fisher-KPP model (5)-(6) and rearranging
terms gives the following ODE for ρ(z)
D d2ρ
dz2 + cdρ
dz + r ρ

1 −ρ
k

= 0 ,
z ∈R .
(25)
Moreover, since the Fisher-KPP model (5)-(6) admits the homogeneous steady-state
solutions ρ ≡k and ρ ≡0, which can be proven to be linearly asymptotically stable and
unstable, respectively, it is natural to complement the ODE (25) with the boundary
conditions
ρ(−∞) = k ,
ρ(∞) = 0 ,
(26)
so that the stable homogeneous steady-state “invades” the unstable one. The bound-
ary conditions (26) then corresponds to considering a scenario in which the population
spreads across the uncolonised surrounding space. A classical result is that there
exist monotonically decreasing solutions of the problem (25)-(26), provided that
c ≥c∗:= 2
√
rD, where the threshold value of the speed c∗is called the minimal wave
speed (Murray, 2003; Perthame, 2015).
When a travelling-wave solution ρ(z) exists, one may then be interested in investi-
gating whether the solution ρ(t, x) to the Cauchy problem defined by the PDE model
with x ∈R and complemented with an appropriate initial condition will converge to
a solution qualitatively similar to the travelling-wave solution for large t and x. A
technique that can be used to address this aspect consists of employing the following
space and time scaling
(t, x) →
 t
ε, x
ε

,
(27)
and investigating the behaviour of ρε(t, x) ≡ρ (t/ε, x/ε) in the limit ε →0 (Evans
and Souganidis, 1989; Freidlin, 1986). For instance, choosing D = r = k = 1, under
the scaling (27) the Fisher-KPP model (5)-(6) with x ∈R reads as
ε∂tρε = ε2∂2
xxρε + ρε(1 −ρε) ,
x ∈R .
(28)
As ε →0, the limit, ρ(z), of the travelling wave solution, ρε(z), for the rescaled Fisher-
KPP equation (28) satisfies the relation ρ(z) (1 −ρ(z)) = 0. Hence, it attains only
29
the values 1 and 0. Moreover, the corresponding minimal wave speed is c∗= 2. In
accordance with this, it is possible to prove that, when ε →0, the solution of the
Cauchy problem defined by complementing the rescaled Fisher-KPP equation (28)
with the initial condition
ρε(0, x) = ρ0(x) :=
(
1,
if x < 0
0,
if x ≥0
(29)
converges (in some appropriate sense) to ρ0(x−c∗t), with c∗= 2 (Evans and Sougani-
dis, 1989; Freidlin, 1986). A corroboration of this result is shown in Figure 3, where
numerical solutions of (28)-(29) are seen to become increasingly step-like as ε →0
and with a numerically calculated wave speed v ≊2. As shown in Barles et al. (1990);
Fleming and Souganidis (1986); Evans and Souganidis (1989), a useful tool to prove
this and related asymptotic results is the real phase WKB ansatz borrowed from
geometric optics, which is also referred to as the Hopf-Cole transformation:
ρε(t, x) = exp
uε(t, x)
ε

.
(30)
A key observation underlying the change of variable (30) is that if uε(t, x) converges
(uniformly, locally in time) to u(t, x) as ε →0, then ρ(t, x) = 0 and ρ(t, x) = 1
correspond to u(t, x) < 0 and u(t, x) = 0, respectively. Hence, the limiting behaviour
of ρε(t, x) can be characterised by studying the limiting behaviour of uε(t, x). The
advantage of this approach lies in the fact that upon substituting the ansatz (30) into
the rescaled non-local PDE (28), one finds that uε(t, x) satisfies a type of Hamilton-
Jacobi equation for which there is a range of mathematical tools, stemming from the
work of Lions and coworkers in the 1980s on viscosity solutions of Hamilton-Jacobi
equations (Crandall and Lions, 1983; Crandall et al., 1984; Lions, 1982). This in turn
facilitates studies into the behaviour of ρε(t, x) as ε →0.
4.2.2 Concentration phenomena in non-local PDE models of
evolutionary dynamics
A commonly made assumption within theoretical studies into the evolution of
phenotype-structured populations is that phenotype density functions are Gaus-
sians (Rice, 2004). Hence, it is natural to consider non-local PDE models for
evolutionary dynamics in phenotype-structured populations of form (10) with y ∈R
subject to initial conditions of the form
n(0, y) = n0(y) :=
ρ0
p
2π σ2
0
exp
"
−
 y −¯y02
2 σ2
0
#
,
ρ0 , σ0 ∈R+
∗, ¯y0 ∈R .
(31)
Here, the parameters ρ0 and ¯y0 model the initial size of the population and the mean
or prevailing phenotype in the population at time t = 0, respectively. The parameter
σ2
0 is the related variance, which provides a measure of intra-population phenotypic
30
heterogeneity. It is possible to prove (see, for instance, Almeida et al. 2019; Ardaˇseva
et al. 2020; Chisholm et al. 2016) that, when subject to the initial condition (31), the
non-local PDE model (10)-(12) with y ∈R admits solutions of the Gaussian form
n(t, y) =
ρ(t)
p
2π σ2(t)
exp
"
−(y −¯y(t))2
2 σ2(t)
#
,
(32)
where the size of the cell population, ρ(t), the mean or prevailing phenotype, ¯y(t), and
the inverse of the related variance, v(t) = 1/σ2(t), satisfy the Cauchy problem





























dv
dt = 2
 1 −Dv2
,
d¯y
dt = 2
v (φ −¯y) ,
dρ
dt =

γ −1
v −(¯y −φ)2

−κ ρ

ρ ,
v(0) = 1/σ2
0 ,
¯y(0) = ¯y0 ,
ρ(0) = ρ0 .
(33)
An exhaustive quantitative characterisation of the dynamics of the phenotype density
n(t, y) can then be obtained by analysing the behaviour of the components of the
solution to the Cauchy problem (33).
Furthermore, when studying evolutionary dynamics in phenotype-structured pop-
ulations, one is often interested in predicting the phenotypic composition of the
population over long timescales in scenarios wherein: (i) proliferation and death play
a leading role in phenotypic evolution, since they drive adaptation by natural selec-
tion; (ii) phenotypic changes are rare, and their role is thus limited to generating
the substrate for natural selection to act upon (B¨urger, 2000; Perthame, 2006). In
the framework of mathematical models of form (10), this can be done by using the
parameter scaling
D := ε2
(34)
along with the time scaling t →t/ε, and then investigating the behaviour of nε(t, y) ≡
n(t/ε, y) in the asymptotic regime ε →0 (Diekmann et al., 2005; Perthame, 2006;
Perthame and Barles, 2008). Under this scaling, the non-local PDE (10) with y ∈R
reads as





ε∂tnε = ε2∂2
yynε + nε R(y, ρε) ,
y ∈R ,
ρε(t) :=
Z
R
nε(t, y) dy .
(35)
In the case when there is little phenotypic variability in the population at t = 0,
which is a case often considered in adaptive dynamics (Diekmann, 2004), one can also
assume that intra-population phenotypic heterogeneity is initially small and then use
the additional parameter scaling
σ2
0 := ε
(36)
31
in (31), which gives the initial condition
nε(0, y) = n0
ε(y) :=
ρ0
√
2πε exp
"
−
 y −¯y02
2ε
#
,
ρ0 ∈R+
∗, ¯y0 ∈R .
(37)
From (33) and (32), one sees that, when subject to the initial condition (37), the
rescaled non-local PDE obtained by complementing (35) with (11)-(12) admits the
solution
nε(t, y) = ρε(t)
√
2πε exp
"
−(y −¯yε(t))2
2ε
#
,
(38)
where

















d¯yε
dt = 2 (φ −¯yε),
ε dρε
dt =
nh
γ −ε −(¯yε −φ)2i
−κ ρε
o
ρε,
¯yε(0) = ¯y0,
ρε(0) = ρ0 .
(39)
Under the additional assumption that ¯y0 is such that (¯y0 −φ)2 < γ, letting ε →0
in (38) and (39) one finds
nε(t, y) −−−⇀
ε→0 ρ(t)δ¯y(t)(y)
(weakly in measures) ,
(40)
where ¯y(t) satisfies the Cauchy problem





d¯y
dt = 2 (φ −¯y) ,
¯y(0) = ¯y0 ,
(41)
and ρ(t) > 0 is given as a function of ¯y(t) by the relation
ρ(t) = γ −(¯y(t) −φ)2
k
for a.e. t ∈(0, ∞) .
(42)
This is also confirmed by the results of numerical simulations of (35), subject to (37)
and complemented with (11)-(12), which are displayed in Figure 5. Here, numerical
solutions are seen to be of the Gaussian form (38), which becomes concentrated as
a weighted infinitely sharp Gaussian (i.e. a weighted Dirac mass) in the asymptotic
regime ε →0.
The concentration phenomenon expressed by the asymptotic result (40) – together
with the assumptions placed for the initial condition, fitness function, and parameter
regime for the rescaling – provides a mathematical formalisation for the following idea:
when phenotypic changes are rare and the fitness function has a single maximum point
(i.e. there is only one phenotype with maximal fitness – the ‘fittest’ phenotype) then,
32
if a phenotype-structured population is monomorphic (shows only one trait) at t = 0,
the population will remain monomorphic at all times t > 0.
Moreover, as proposed in Diekmann et al. (2005), the concentration point (i.e.
the centre of the Dirac mass) ¯y(t) can be biologically interpreted as the trait that
is shown by the population at time t. Hence, the ODE (41)1 can be regarded as a
type of canonical equation of adaptive dynamics: an ODE that describes how the
prevailing trait in the population changes over time (Metz and Diekmann, 1986). From
the Cauchy problem (41) it is easy to see that ¯y(t) →φ as t →∞. Recalling that the
parameter φ models the fittest phenotype (see the fitness function defined via (11)-
(12)), the latter convergence result translates into mathematical terms the concept of
“survival of the fittest” originating from evolutionary theory (Spencer, 1864).
Notably, the solution to the rescaled non-local PDE (35) also exhibits concentration
phenomena for a broader class of fitness functions and initial conditions, provided they
have essentially the same structural properties of the fitness function defined via (11)-
(12) and the initial condition (37) – in other words, functions R(y, ρ) that are strictly
concave in y and strictly monotonically decreasing in ρ, and initial conditions n0
ε(y)
that converge (in the weak sense of measures) to weighted Dirac masses as ε →0.
A robust method for studying such concentration phenomena was originally pro-
posed in Diekmann et al. (2005); Perthame (2006), and then developed and extended
in Barles and Perthame (2007); Barles et al. (2009); Chisholm et al. (2016); Lam
(2017); Lorz et al. (2017, 2011); Mirrahimi et al. (2012); Perthame and Barles (2008).
This built on the observation that, given that the rescaled non-local PDE (35)1 is of
close form to the rescaled Fisher-KPP equation (28), with the exception of how the
reaction term is defined, it is natural to make a change of variable of the same type
as (30), that is, use the WKB ansatz
nε(0, y) = exp
uε(t, y)
ε

.
(43)
We refer the interested reader to Perthame (2014) for an effective summary of this
method, which, in brief, consists of deriving a priori L∞- and BV -estimates for ρε(t)
and then analysing the Hamilton-Jacobi equation for uε(t, y) obtained by substitut-
ing (43) into (35)1. Through this method, it is possible to prove that the asymptotic
result (40) still holds, under appropriate assumptions on the fitness function and the
initial condition, including that
nε(t, y) = n0
ε(y) := exp
u0
ε(y)
ε

,
where u0
ε(y) is a strictly concave function such that
n0
ε(y) −−−⇀
ε→0 ρ0δ¯y0(y) ,
ρ0 ∈R+
∗, ¯y0 ∈R .
33
Under this more general scenario, the concentration point ¯y(t) in (40) becomes the
solution to the Cauchy problem







d¯y
dt = −∂yR(¯y, ρ)
∂2yyu(t, ¯y) ,
¯y(0) = ¯y0 .
(44)
Here u(t, y) – which is the limit of uε(t, y) as ε →0 – is a viscosity solution (in the
sense introduced in Barles and Perthame (2007); Barles et al. (2009); Perthame and
Barles (2008)) of the constrained Hamilton-Jacobi equation



∂tu(t, y) = (∂yu(t, y))2 + R(y, ρ(t)) ,
y ∈R ,
max
y∈R u(t, y) = u(t, ¯y(t)) = 0 ,
(45)
subject to the initial condition u(0, y) = u0(y) (i.e. the limit of u0
ε(y) as ε →0),
and it is such that ∂2
yyu(t, ¯y(t)) < 0. Furthermore, under the assumption that the
function R(y, ρ) is strictly monotonically decreasing in ρ, and thus invertible, the
weight ρ(t) > 0 in (40) is given as a function of ¯y(t) by the relation
R(¯y(t), ρ(t)) = 0 for a.e. t ∈(0, ∞) ,
(46)
and it can also be regarded as a Lagrange multiplier associated with the con-
straint (45)2. Note that considerations analogous to those we made on the ODE (41)1
apply to the ODE (44)1 as well. Specifically, the ODE (44)1 can be interpreted as a
type of canonical equation of adaptive dynamics and it is such that, when R(y, ρ) is a
strictly concave function of y that attains its maximum at φ ∈R (i.e. φ is the fittest
phenotype), if ¯y(t) converges to some ¯y∞∈R as t →∞then ¯y∞= φ.
As final remarks, the aforementioned results on Gaussian solutions and concentra-
tion phenomena extend to the case where the fitness function is also a periodic function
of t, which corresponds to the situation of populations exposed to periodically fluctu-
ating environments, as demonstrated, for instance, in Ardaˇseva et al. (2020); Lorenzi
et al. (2015) and Figueroa Iglesias and Mirrahimi (2018); Mirrahimi et al. (2015).
Furthermore, concentration phenomena have been investigated also in non-local PDE
models of evolutionary dynamics of forms similar to (10) but where the diffusion term
is replaced by an advection term modelling cell differentiation, with an advection
velocity that is a function of the phenotype structure (Guilberteau et al., 2024).
4.2.3 Travelling waves and concentration phenomena in PS-PIDE
models of spatial and evolutionary dynamics
Travelling waves
In the context of PS-PIDE models of type (2), travelling waves are solutions of the
form
n(t, x, y) ≡n(z, y) ,
z = x −c t ,
z ∈(−∞, ∞) ,
(47)
34
which generalises the form (24) to the case where a phenotypic structure is incor-
porated into the model. Building on the formal results presented in Bouin et al.
(2012), particular attention has been given to travelling-wave solutions of the PS-
PIDE model (8)-(9) with x ≡x ∈R and y ≡y ∈(0, Y ), where Y ∈R+
∗, and subject
to zero-flux boundary conditions at y = 0 and y = Y .
Summarising, the existence of solutions to the boundary value problem defined by
complementing the PDE obtained by substituting (47) into the PS-PIDE model (8)-(9)
with appropriate boundary conditions at z = −∞and z = ∞was proven in Bouin and
Calvez (2014), where the corresponding minimal wave speed was also characterised.
The convergence of the solution to the PS-PIDE model (8)-(9) to travelling waves, for
large t and x and under appropriate assumptions on the initial condition, was subse-
quently studied in Turanova (2015). The first step of the study carried out in Turanova
(2015) employs the space and time scaling (27), which leads to the following rescaled
PS-PIDE model





ε∂tnε = ε2 D(y) ∂2
xxnε + D∂2
yynε + nε R(ρε) ,
x ∈R , y ∈(0, Y ) ,
ρε(t, x) :=
Z Y
0
nε(t, x, y) dy ,
(48)
complemented with (9). Then, one studies the limiting behaviour as ε →0 of the
solution to the Hamilton-Jacobi equation which is obtained by substituting the WKB
ansatz
nε(t, x, y) = exp
uε(t, x, y)
ε

(49)
into (48)1. Note that (49) is a natural extension of (30) to the case where the solution to
the model equation depends both on the spatial variable x and the phenotypic variable
y. Convergence of the solution to the PS-PIDE model (8)-(9) to travelling waves as
t →∞, again under appropriate assumptions on the initial condition, was also studied
in Berestycki et al. (2015); Bouin et al. (2017), where a detailed characterisation of
the dynamics of the maximum point of the phenotype density function n along the
phenotypic dimension y (i.e. the dynamics of the prevailing phenotype) at the edge
of the wave front was also established. The emergence of accelerating fronts when
Y = ∞(i.e. in the case of unbounded motility) was also investigated in Berestycki
et al. (2015); Bouin et al. (2012, 2017).
Concentration phenomena
A natural generalisation of Gaussian initial conditions of form (31) to the case when
spatial dynamics are also taken into account is provided by initial conditions of the
form
n(0, x, y) = n0(x, y) :=
ρ0(x)
p
2π σ2
0(x)
exp
"
−
 y −¯y0(x)
2
2 σ2
0(x)
#
(50)
with
ρ0 : X →R+
∗,
¯y0 : X →R ,
σ0 : X →R+
∗,
35
where the functions ρ0(x), ¯y0(x), and σ2
0(x) model, respectively, the cell density, the
mean or prevailing phenotype of cells at position x, and the related variance at time
t = 0.
In Villa et al. (2021b), it was proven that the PS-PIDE model (13)-(15) with x ≡
x ∈X ⊂R, y ≡y ∈R, D = 0 (i.e. cell movement is neglected), and S(t, x) ≡Σ(x),
where the Σ(x) is given (i.e. the spatially heterogeneous environment in which the
population is embedded does not evolve in time), and subject to initial condition (50),
admits solutions of the Gaussian form
n(t, x, y) =
ρ(t, x)
p
2π σ2(t, x)
exp
"
−(y −¯y(t, x))2
2 σ2(t, x)
#
.
(51)
Here the cell density, ρ(t, x), the mean or prevailing phenotype at position x, ¯y(t, x),
and the inverse of the related variance, v(t, x) = 1/σ2(t, x), satisfy a Cauchy problem
analogous to (33), that is,

























∂tv = 2
 1 −Dv2
,
∂t¯y = 2
v (f(x) −¯y) ,
∂tρ =

g(x) −1
v −(¯y −f(x))2

−κ ρ

ρ ,
v(0, x) = 1/σ2
0(x) ,
¯y(0, x) = ¯y0(x) ,
ρ(0, x) = ρ0(x) ,
x ∈X ,
where f(x) ≡f[Σ](x) and g(x) ≡g[Σ](x). As a result, under the space and time
scaling (27), the parameter scaling (34), and the scaling σ2
0(x) ≡ε (which generalises
the parameter scaling (36) to the case where spatial dynamics are also taken into
account), given appropriate assumptions on the functions g(x), f(x), and ¯y0(x), it
is natural to expect concentration phenomena along the phenotypic dimension y to
emerge at each spatial position x.
In fact, concentration phenomena have also been studied for rescaled PS-PIDE
models of form





ε∂tnε = ε2D∂2
xxnε + ε2∂2
yynε + nε R(y, ρε, Sε) ,
x ∈X , y ∈Y ,
ρε(t, x) :=
Z
Y
nε(t, x, y) dy ,
(52)
which can be obtained from PS-PIDE models like (13), when x ≡x ∈X, y ≡y ∈Y,
D(y) ≡D, and S(t, x) ≡S(t, x), by employing the space and time scaling (27) along
with the parameter scaling (34).
To provide greater detail, using the WKB ansatz (49) – a natural choice in view
of the similarities between the rescaled PS-PIDE (52)1 and the rescaled non-local
PDE (35)1 – and making appropriate assumptions on the initial condition, nε(0, x, y),
36
the fitness function, R, and the governing equation for Sε, asymptotic results can be
obtained that express concentration phenomena analogous to (40), i.e.
nε(t, x, y) −−−⇀
ε→0 ρ(t, x)δ¯y(t,x)(y)
(weakly in measures) .
(53)
These were proven in Jabin and Schram (2023), building on the results presented
in Mirrahimi and Perthame (2015), taking D = 0 and Y ≡R. In addition, when
X ≡R, assuming
n0
ε(y) −−−⇀
ε→0 ρ0(x)δ¯y0(x)(y) ,
ρ0 : R →R+
∗,
¯y0 : R →R ,
one can show, as performed in Villa et al. (2021a) taking D > 0, that the concentration
point ¯y(t, x) in (53) formally satisfies the following Cauchy problem







∂t¯y = −∂yR(¯y, ρ, S)
∂2yyu(t, x, ¯y) ,
¯y(0, x) = ¯y0(x) ,
x ∈R .
(54)
In (54)1, the function S is the limit of Sε as ε →0 and, analogously to (44), the
function u(t, x, y) , which is the limit of uε(t, x, y) as ε →0, satisfies a Hamilton-Jacobi
equation subject to the constraint
max
y∈R u(t, x, y) = u(t, x, ¯y(t, x)) = 0 ,
(t, x) ∈(0, ∞) × R ,
and it is such that ∂2
yyu(t, x, ¯y(t, x)) < 0. Moreover, if the function R(y, ρ, S) is strictly
monotonically decreasing in ρ, the weight ρ(t, x) > 0 in (53) is given as a function of
¯y(t, x) and S(t, x) by the relation
R(¯y(t, x), ρ(t, x), S(t, x)) = 0 , for a.e. t ∈(0, ∞) .
(55)
From a biological point of view, the asymptotic result (53) extends the asymptotic
result (40) to the case of phenotype-structured populations in spatially heteroge-
neous environments, whereby the concentration point ¯y(t, x) represents the trait that
is shown by the population at time t and position x (i.e. the locally prevailing phe-
notype). Furthermore, for each x, the ODE (54)1 can be regarded as a generalised
canonical equation of adaptive dynamics. When R(y, ρ, S) is a strictly concave func-
tion of y, with maximum point given by the function f[S](t, x) (i.e. f[S](t, x) is the
fittest phenotype at position x and time t depending on the environmental conditions
determined by S(t, x)), if S(t, x) and ¯y(t, x) converge, respectively, to some S∞(x)
and ¯y∞(x) for every x as t →∞then ¯y∞(x) = f[S∞](x). This formalises in math-
ematical terms the idea that the fittest phenotype, which is determined by the local
environmental conditions, is ultimately selected at each spatial position.
As a concluding remark, we note that concentration phenomena of type (53) have
also been investigated in PS-PIDE models of form (13) with D(y) ≡D (see Bouin
37
and Mirrahimi 2015) and in more general PS-PIDE models of related forms (see Hao
et al. 2019).
Concentration phenomena across travelling waves
More recently, concentration phenomena have been investigated across travelling waves
in PS-PIDE models for the spatial spread and evolutionary dynamics of cell pop-
ulations under the pressure-based form (17) and the taxis-based form (20), with
x ≡x ∈R and y ≡y ∈(0, Y ) where Y ∈R+
∗. Applying the space and time scal-
ing (27) and the parameter scaling (34), rescaled models of the type of (20) are given
by





ε∂tnε + ε ∂x [nεχ(y)∂xSε −εD∂xnε] = ε2∂2
yynε + nε R(y, ρε, Sε) , x ∈R , y ∈(0, Y ) ,
ρε(t, x) :=
Z Y
0
nε(t, x, y) dy ,
(56)
complemented with an equation governing the dynamics of Sε(t, x), and rescaled
models of the type of (17) are given by





ε∂tnε −ε ∂x [nεµ(y)∂xPε] = ε2∂2
yynε + nε R(y, Pε) ,
x ∈R , y ∈(0, Y ) ,
Pε(t, x) := Π[ρε](t, x) ,
ρε(t, x) :=
Z Y
0
nε(t, x, y) dy .
(57)
Both rescaled PS-PIDEs are subject to zero-flux boundary conditions at y = 0 and
y = Y .
In particular, under appropriate assumptions on the model functions, including
that the function R is strictly monotonically decreasing in ρ, employing the ansatz (49),
it was shown that rescaled PS-PIDEs of form (56) (see Lorenzi and Painter 2022;
Lorenzi et al. 2023) and rescaled PS-PIDEs of form (57) (see Lorenzi et al. 2022;
Macfarlane et al. 2022) formally admit travelling-wave solutions nε(t, x, y) ≡nε(z, y),
with c ∈R+
∗, such that
nε(z, y) ≈ρ(z)δ¯y(z)(y) ,
as ε →0 .
(58)
These correspond to biological scenarios wherein the cell population is monomorphic
at each position along the wave, and the concentration point ¯y(z) and the weight ρ(z)
represent, respectively, the trait that is expressed by the cells and the cell density at
position z. For the rescaled PS-PIDE model (56), ¯y(z) formally satisfies the ODE

c −χ(¯y)dS
dz
 d¯y
dz = ∂yR(¯y, ρ, S)
∂2yyu(z, ¯y) ,
z ∈Supp (ρ) ,
(59)
with Supp(ρ) := {z ∈R : ρ(z) > 0}. Moreover, ρ(z) > 0 is formally given as a function
of ¯y(z) and S(z) by the relation
R(¯y(z), ρ(z), S(z)) = 0 ,
z ∈Supp(ρ) .
(60)
38
The ODE (59) and the relation (60) are coupled with an ODE for S(z), which is the
travelling-wave solution of the equation for Sε(t, x) as ε →0. Analogously, for the
rescaled PS-PIDE model (57), ¯y(z) formally satisfies the ODE

c + µ(¯y)dP
dz
 d¯y
dz = ∂yR(¯y, P)
∂2yyu(z, ¯y),
z ∈Supp (P) ,
(61)
and P(z) > 0 and ρ(z) > 0 are formally given as functions of ¯y(z) by the relations
R(¯y(z), P(z)) = 0 ,
ρ(z) = Π−1[P](z) ,
z ∈Supp(P) ,
(62)
where Π−1 denotes the inverse of the function Π. The existence of this is ensured by
the following assumptions on Π(ρ)
Π(0) = 0 ,
d
dρΠ(ρ) > 0 for ρ ∈R+
∗,
(63)
which are common assumptions to make. The function u(z, y) in (59) (or (61)) formally
satisfies a Hamilton-Jacobi equation subject to the constraint
max
y∈[0,Y ] u(z, y) = u(z, ¯y(z)) = 0 ,
z ∈Supp(ρ) (or z ∈Supp(P)) ,
and is such that ∂2
yyu(z, ¯y(z)) < 0.
Moreover, under definition (18) taking κ =
1
ρM
with ρM ∈R+
∗, i.e. defining
R(y, S, ρ) ≡R(y, ρ) := r(y) −ρ
ρM
,
and under definition (14) taking κ =
1
PM
with PM ∈R+
∗, i.e. defining
R(y, P) := r(y) −P
PM
,
the relations (60) and (62) reduce, respectively, to
ρ(z) = ρM r(¯y(z)) ,
z ∈Supp(ρ) ,
(64)
and
P(z) = PM r(¯y(z)) ,
ρ(z) = Π−1[P](z) ,
z ∈Supp(P) .
(65)
Furthermore, one can set monotonicity assumptions on the functions r(y), χ(y), and
µ(y) that are relevant to biological scenarios in which the inherent energetic cost
attached to cellular activities leads to proliferation-migration trade-offs: y close to
0 corresponds to high proliferation and low migration abilities, while y close to Y
corresponds to low proliferation and high migration abilities. Thus, we assume the
39
functions χ and µ to be monotonically increasing on (0, Y ) and such that 0 < χ(0) <
χ(Y ) < ∞and 0 < µ(0) < µ(Y ) < ∞, while the function r is monotonically decreasing
on (0, Y ) and such that r(0) = 1 and r(Y ) = 0. Considering the bulk of the population
to be at z = −∞, it is then natural to complement the ODEs (59) and (61) with the
boundary condition
¯y(−∞) = 0 ,
(66)
so that the relations (64) and (65) give, respectively,
ρ(−∞) = ρM
(67)
and
P(−∞) = PM ,
ρ(−∞) = Π−1(PM) =: ρM .
(68)
Note that assumptions (63) ensure that Π−1(PM) is the maximum value of ρ(z) =
Π−1[P](z) if 0 ≤P ≤PM. Under the boundary condition (66), through direct calcu-
lations on (59)-(60) and (61)-(62), it is then possible to show that, in both cases, there
is a minimal wave speed c∗∈R+
∗such that if c > c∗then the concentration point ¯y(z)
and the weight ρ(z) in (58) formally satisfy the following relations
¯y(z) = 0 ∧
¯y′(z) > 0 , z ∈(−∞, ℓ) ∧
¯y(ℓ) = Y
and
ρ(−∞) = ρM ∧ρ′(z) < 0 , z ∈(−∞, ℓ) ∧ρ(z) = 0 , z ∈[ℓ, ∞) ,
with ℓ∈R ∪{∞}. Under the aforementioned monotonicity assumptions on the func-
tions r(y), χ(y), and µ(y), these results provide a mathematical formalisation of the
idea that cells with a more migratory and less proliferative phenotype (i.e. in pheno-
typic states corresponding to y close to Y ) are concentrated towards the front of the
travelling wave, whereas cells with a less migratory and more proliferative phenotype
(i.e. in phenotypic states corresponding to y close to 0) make up the population bulk
in the rear of the wave. Numerical simulations of the rescaled pressure-based PS-PIDE
model (57) and the rescaled taxis-based PS-PIDE model (56) show this within-wave
phenotype structuring (see Figure 6(b), left panel and Figure 7(a), left panel), where
we also note the verification of the minimal wave speed (see Figure 6(b), right panel
and Figure 7(a), right panel).
4.3 Tools and techniques to simulate PS-PIDE models
When simulating PS-PIDEs of form (2), numerical challenges may arise due to the
potential composite shapes and sharp features of the solution, or the stiff15 nature
of the problems. We offer a brief step-by-step guide into the techniques that can be
used to overcome these challenges, when employing numerical schemes that rely on
15A stiff PDE generally contains terms that can lead to rapid variations in the solution, to the extent
that methods for numerical integration in time would generally require extremely small time-steps to ensure
stability. This concept naturally extends to PDE systems, where dynamics modelled by different equations
may occur over different timescales.
40
the method of lines (MOL) (Hundsdorfer and Verwer, 2003). We illustrate through the
following one-dimensional, in each of physical and phenotype space, PS-PIDE model





∂tn = ∂x [D(y)∂xn −A(y, ρ, S)n] + ¯D∂2
yyn + nR(y, ρ, S) , x ∈X , y ∈Y,
ρ(t, x) :=
Z
Y
n(t, x, y) dy .
(69)
We note that we can obtain the PS-PIDE (7) by taking A ≡0, the PS-PIDE (17)
with Π(ρ) := ρ by taking D ≡0 and A := −µ(y)∂xρ, and the PS-PIDE (20) by taking
D ≡0 and A := χ(y)∂xS.
The MOL has been the most popular method for simulating PS-PIDE models,
and involves a discretisation of the PS-PIDE in both phenotype and physical space
to obtain a high dimensional system of ODEs. The solution of this system is tracked
over a computational mesh and integrated in time through an appropriate method.
Discretisation in phenotype and physical space
Naturally, numerical solutions based on the MOL require finite domains16, i.e. X ⊂R
and Y ⊂R in (69). Consider a uniform discretisation of the domain X ×Y, comprising
of Nx × Ny grid cells each of area ∆x × ∆y and with cell centres {xi}i=1,...,Nx ×
{yj}j=1,...,Ny, where xi = i∆x −1
2∆x (i = 1, ..., Nx) and yj = j∆y −1
2∆y (j =
1, ..., Ny). We then consider a numerical approximation for the average of n, S, and ρ
across each cell, and let
n(t, xi, yj) ≈ni,j(t) ,
ρ(t, xi) ≈ρi(t) := ∆y
Ny
X
j=1
ni,j(t) ,
S(t, xi) ≈Si(t) ,
where the definition of ρi relies on a discretisation of the integral (69)2 using a middle
Riemann sum. Then, each ni,j satisfies an ODE in the form
d
dtni,j(t) = Mi,j(t) + Ci,j(t) + ni,j(t)Ri,j(t) ,
(70)
where Mi,j(t) is defined by the approximation of the term that models movement
through physical space in (69), Ci,j(t) is the approximation of the term that mod-
els phenotypic changes, and Ri,j(t) := R(yj, ρi(t), Si(t)). Adopting the finite volume
method (Eymard, 2000), the term Mi,j is defined via
Mi,j(t) :=
1
∆x
h
F ∗
i+ 1
2 ,j(t) −F ∗
i−1
2 ,j(t)
i
,
i = 2, ..., Nx −1, j = 1, ..., Ny,
where F ∗
i+ 1
2 ,j(t) and F ∗
i−1
2 ,j(t) represent the numerical approximations of the flux
through physical space along the cell boundary

xi + 1
2∆x
	
×
 yi −1
2∆y, yi + 1
2∆y

16If one needs to simulate a PS-PIDE on an unbounded domain, some alternative approach (such as a
pseudospectral method, e.g. Fornberg 1998) would need to be invoked.
41
and along the cell boundary

xi −1
2∆x
	
×
 yi −1
2∆y, yi + 1
2∆y

, respectively. Apply-
ing a first-order central finite difference approximation for the first-order derivative
and a first-order upwind approximation for the advection term (David and Ruan,
2022; Lorenzi et al., 2022), these are given by
F ∗
i+ 1
2 ,j(t) := D(yj)ni+1,j −ni,j
∆x
−

Ai+ 1
2 ,j(t)

+ ni,j(t) +

Ai+ 1
2 ,j(t)

−ni+1,j , (71)
F ∗
i−1
2 ,j(t) := D(yj)ni,j −ni−1,j
∆x
−

Ai−1
2 ,j(t)

+ ni−1,j(t) +

Ai−1
2 ,j(t)

−ni,j , (72)
where we used the notation (·)+ = max(0, ·) and (·)−= min(0, ·). The terms Ai+ 1
2 ,j(t)
and Ai−1
2 ,j(t) represent the approximation of A(y, ρ, S) along the cell boundary of
interest, and their definition will be problem-dependent. For instance, in (17) these
may be given by
Ai+ 1
2 ,j := −µ(yj)ρi+1 −ρi
∆x
and
Ai−1
2 ,j := −µ(yj)ρi −ρi−1
∆x
,
while in (20) they may be given by
Ai+ 1
2 ,j := χ(yj)Si+1 −Si
∆x
and
Ai−1
2 ,j := χ(yj)Si −Si−1
∆x
.
Following similar steps, the approximation Ci,j(t) of the linear diffusion term in
phenotype space is given by the three-point stencil scheme
Ci,j(t) := ¯D ni,j−1(t) −2ni,j(t) + ni,j+1(t)
(∆y)2
,
i = 1, ..., Nx, j = 2, ..., Ny −1,
which is analogous to the typical second-order central finite difference approximation
of second-order derivatives. The definition of Mi,j(t) and Ci,j(t) at the remaining
boundary cells will depend on the chosen boundary conditions, and can follow from
first principles of the finite volume method or may be imposed through the addition
of ‘ghost points’.
The use of a first-order upwind scheme in (71) and (72) is particularly helpful as a
means to avoid the emergence of spurious oscillations, especially given that solutions
can display large gradients or even discontinuities – e.g. in the absence of linear dif-
fusion. These features may arise as concentration phenomena can occur in phenotype
space (i.e. n becomes concentrated as a sharp Gaussian along the y-dimension, see
Figure 5), while travelling fronts or patterns with sharp interfaces can emerge in phys-
ical space (Lorenzi et al., 2022; Lorenzi and Painter, 2022; Lorenzi et al., 2023), see for
instance Figure 7. In some cases a first-order upwind scheme may not suffice and alter-
native discretisations – e.g. using flux limiters, such as the MUSCL scheme (Van Leer,
1979) – may be more appropriate.
Another strategy to circumvent the issues induced by the lack of regularity that
arise if the solution concentrates into a Dirac mass (e.g. as when introducing the
42
scalings (27) and (34) and considering the asymptotic regime ε →0) is to exploit the
WKB ansatz (49), or a related ansatz, and solve the equation for uε instead, so as to
define an asymptotic preserving scheme (Almeida et al., 2022; Calvez et al., 2023).
Given the potential for the solution to exhibit sharp features, an important step
in mesh selection is to check the solution accuracy via testing different levels of mesh
refinement. Alternatively, one may opt for a non-uniform mesh that concentrates grid
points in areas of large gradients (Kolbe et al., 2014; Kolbe and Sfakianakis, 2022).
Of course, mesh refinement and coarsening algorithms inevitably lead to increased
computational costs.
Time integration
Following the discretisation in phenotype and physical space, one needs to solve the
system of Nx×Ny ODEs (70) by integrating in time. Consider a uniform discretisation
of the time interval [0, T] with time-step of size ∆t, i.e. tk = k∆t (k = 0, ..., Nt).
Introducing the notation nk
i,j := ni,j(tk) – and similarly for the other time-dependent
variables – a first-order forward difference scheme yields
nk+1
i,j
= nk
i,j + ∆t

M k
i,j + Ck
i,j + nk
i,jRk
i,j

.
This is the simplest explicit scheme that one may adopt, being first-order in time;
higher-order schemes may be more appropriate if the problem requires higher accuracy,
e.g. when observing features as in Lorenzi and Painter (2022). Nonetheless, stiffer
problems may require an excessively small value for ∆t to ensure stability in an explicit
scheme, e.g. due to a severe CFL constraint (Hundsdorfer and Verwer, 2003). If so, an
implicit scheme may be preferable and, as an example, a first-order backward difference
for the time derivative yields
nk+1
i,j
= nk
i,j + ∆t

M k+1
i,j
+ Ck+1
i,j
+ nk+1
i,j Rk+1
i,j

.
This is a simple example of a fully implicit scheme which is unconditionally stable,
but may remain computationally expensive – especially in higher dimensions – due to
the requirement of inverting large matrices at each iteration.
One method to lower the computational cost associated with implicit solvers is
through a time-splitting scheme: treating stiff parts of the problem implicitly, and
solving the remaining parts explicitly (Macfarlane et al., 2022; Lorenzi et al., 2022).
In the case of simple forms of spatial movement (e.g. linear diffusion) one may, for
instance, treat the reaction term implicitly and the conservative part of the equation –
which can often occur on a slower timescale – explicitly, e.g. see Lorenzi et al. (2015).
However, the precise choice is inevitably problem-dependent and more complex forms
of cellular motion may also require an implicit treatment (Lorenzi et al., 2022).
The use of implicit solvers is also particularly useful for preserving non-negativity
of solutions: crucial, given the usual biological meaning of n and – generally – the struc-
tural properties of the PS-PIDE . Explicit solvers may indeed fail at this, for example
if the negative part of R becomes particularly large. Implicit-explicit approaches can
also be adopted to circumvent this issue, for instance by splitting the reaction term to
43
treat the negative part of nR implicitly and the positive part explicitly (Lorenzi et al.,
2015; Lorz et al., 2011). Time-splitting schemes relying on exploiting the WKB ansatz
and solving the equation for u instead, in the non-conservative part of the problem,
have also been proposed (Lorenzi et al., 2022).
5 Challenges and perspectives
PS-PIDEs form a powerful modelling tool to account for the complex phenotypic
heterogeneity inherent to a population. With their greater adoption in mathemati-
cal models of collective cell migration, various challenges have emerged with respect
to modelling extensions, analytical results, numerical methods, and the capacity
to connect models with experimental data. We conclude this review with a few
perspectives.
I. The challenge of cell signalling. PS-PIDE models of cell population dynamics
often invoke a somewhat hazy definition of phenotype: a generic variable that defines
cell behaviour in a phenomenological manner. In practice, phenotype is linked to the
internal signalling state and modulated by environmental factors (e.g. extracellular
ligands). ABMs can account for this complexity – e.g. equipping each agent with a
detailed ODE model of signalling with the output altering the phenotypic state – and
various open source modelling toolkits have been developed with such capabilities (see
Metzcar et al. (2019) for an overview). Can similar detail be absorbed within con-
tinuous models? As described, environmental heterogeneity can be accounted for in a
PS-PIDE model, by variables for the external factors that regulate growth, movement,
and phenotype changes (e.g. Ayati et al. 2006; Dyson et al. 2007; Fiandaca et al. 2021;
Lorenzi et al. 2018; Villa et al. 2021a; Fiandaca et al. 2022; Lorenzi and Painter 2022;
Lorenzi et al. 2023). However, these usually take a black box approach for the intra-
cellular processes that link the extracellular to cell behaviour. More direct definitions
for the variability offer a more explicit connection, e.g. associating heterogeneity with
tumbling bias in PS-PIDE models for E.coli migration (Mattingly and Emonet, 2022;
Phan et al., 2024). Fundamental approaches to link structure to signalling could exploit
ABM to population-level formulations, e.g. the framework described in Section 4.1;
a step here has been taken in Freingruber et al. (2024), where a PS-PIDE model is
derived in which phenotype is associated to bound receptor levels, which in turn evolve
through the modelling of receptor-ligand binding. PS-PIDE models have been for-
mulated where structuring is according to intracellular signalling pathways connected
with EMT17 processes (Guilberteau et al., 2023), although these do not include spa-
tial movement. Others have addressed a similar challenge with different frameworks,
for example by starting from a ‘mesoscopic’ kinetic equation that includes dependency
on an internal state variable and employing scaling methods to obtain macroscopic
PDE models (but not PS-PIDEs) with terms that depend on the internal signalling
state (e.g. Erban and Othmer 2004; Engwer et al. 2015). Nevertheless, this remains
an area for significant work, and will become increasingly necessary if this biological
detail is required.
17Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, where a cells transitions from an epithelial (e.g. high cell-cell
adhesion, low motility) to mesenchymal (e.g. cell-extracellular matrix interactions, high motility) state.
44
II. Accounting for energy budgets. Behaviours – migrating, proliferating, protein
synthesis, etc – have energy costs, leading to upper bounds on cell functioning accord-
ing to the rates at which oxygen, nutrients, etc are absorbed and converted into energy.
The links between the energy state and phenotype have received significant attention
in recent years. For example, in E. coli bacteria, much recent attention has explored
the trade-offs due to energetic costs (Keegstra et al., 2022), such as negative corre-
lations between chemotactic gene promoters and population growth rate (Ni et al.,
2020). EMT processes, associated with stages of tissue development, wound healing,
and cancer progression (Nieto et al., 2016; Vilchez Mercedes et al., 2021), have also
been scrutinised from an energetic perspective – e.g. intermediate states that may
correspond to local minima within an energetic landscape (Tam and Weinberg, 2013;
Zadran et al., 2014). Energy, in a broad sense, can be accounted for through modelling
the environmental sources (oxygen, nutrients, etc), as described in I. To describe the
subsequent conversion of these sources by the cell returns us to the above discussion
on intracellular signalling.
III. Extension of other biological movement models. In Section 3 we have illus-
trated the extension of a number of common PDE models of biological movement into
the PS-PIDE form, specifically diffusion-based, pressure-based, and taxis-based models
described therein. There are, naturally, further models used to describe different forms
of biological movement. Non-local aggregation models (Painter et al., 2024), wherein
advection through physical space is according to a non-local evaluation of surround-
ing population density, have become a popular tool to describe the impact of direct
cell to cell (or animal to animal) interactions – such as cell-cell adhesion – on move-
ment. Variation in adhesion is a common and potent form of phenotypic variation:
downregulated cell-cell adhesion can lead to more invasive phenotypes within cancer
invasion (Vilchez Mercedes et al., 2021); differential adhesion is a powerful driver of
cellular sorting during tissue patterning (Tsai et al., 2022). While non-local aggre-
gation models have considered cellular heterogeneity in a discrete manner (e.g. two
populations with distinct adhesion, see (Painter et al., 2024) and references therein),
extensions to continuous heterogeneity are natural; steps in this direction have been
made, for example see Engwer et al. (2017). The resulting equations, though, present
a formidable mathematical and numerical challenge: for example, a doubly non-local
structure, with integral terms for summation across both space and phenotype.
IV. Discrete, continuous, or both? As noted several times, a natural application
of PS-PIDEs would be to describe follower-leader type behaviour, for example as
can be found in invading cancer cells (Vilchez Mercedes et al., 2021), neural crest
migration (McLennan et al., 2015), and wound healing (Vishwakarma et al., 2020).
While a division into followers and leaders is conceptually straightforward, this can
be overly simplistic and misleading (Theveneau and Linker, 2017). A broad spectrum
of states may exist between ‘follower’ and ‘leader’, with transitions in between. PS-
PIDE models, therefore, can form a natural framework to describe this complexity.
But questions then arise regarding the appropriateness of using continuous densities:
45
within such systems, certain states may be confined to small subpopulations – for
example, an invasion process driven by relatively few cells at the front. Turning to a
fully discrete representation is one possibility, but this may also be suboptimal if other
states contain vast numbers of cells. How can we form a bridge, spanning discrete to
continuous populations according to phenotypic state? Some hybrid approaches offer
tantalising directions, e.g. allowing individual cells to emerge from or merge with some
continuous distribution, in a way that ensures mass is conserved (Chiari et al., 2022).
V. Self-organisation within phenotype-structured populations. PS-PIDEs are
sophisticated equations and present a formidable mathematical challenge. However,
in-roads are being made: for example, we illustrated the growing arsenal of techniques
to understand phenotype-structured travelling waves. Travelling waves are one well-
known dynamic that can arise from PDEs, another being self-organising phenomena.
Turing (1952) laid the essential groundwork here, via his well known model for mor-
phogenesis. The now standard stability analysis relied on a near homogeneous initial
state but, as noted earlier, populations are rarely homogeneous and one could expect
phenotypic heterogeneity across even a superficially similar population – e.g. varying
levels of signal activity. Extending pattern formation analyses to models that contain
phenotype structuring is relatively straightforward under simpler binary phenotypes
(e.g. see Painter 2009; Pham et al. 2012; Macfarlane et al. 2022), as the resultant
PDEs are of low order and the same standard Turing-type analysis can be applied. But
extending these analyses to the non-local PS-PIDE framework has, to today, received
little attention.
VI. Analysis of qualitative and quantitative properties of solutions. The
analysis of PS-PIDEs modelling spatial spread and evolutionary dynamics of forms (7),
(17), and (20) is a relatively young research field, wherein a number of fascinating and
challenging open problems have emerged. Just to mention a few problems related to
aspects we have focused on in this review, neither explicit nor semi-explicit solutions
are known, with the exception of the case discussed in Section 4.2.3. This limits our
current level of information on the quantitative properties of the solutions to these
models. Moreover, formal asymptotic results on concentration phenomena across trav-
elling waves, like those discussed here, have still to be established rigorously. In this
we anticipate major difficulties to be posed due to the lack of compactness (Mirrahimi
and Perthame, 2015; Jabin and Schram, 2023). Furthermore, there are no rigorous
asymptotic results, of the type presented in David (2023), on the derivation of free-
boundary problems of Hele-Shaw type from PS-PIDE models of form (17), when the
mobility parameter is a function of the phenotypic state. This problem appears to be
far from being closed given that, as of today, related problems remain open even for
systems of PDEs with cross-diffusion terms corresponding to the case where the phe-
notypic state is binary (Lorenzi et al., 2017; David et al., 2024). Solving these and
related problems will entail harnessing a range of tools and techniques from across
different research areas for the analysis of non-linear and non-local PDEs, thus pro-
moting cross-fertilisation of these areas. Further, it may lead to the development of
new mathematical methods that could also be transferable to cognate research fields.
46
VII. PS-PIDEs over networks. Migration not only allows cells to infiltrate neigh-
bouring areas but also disperse to distant sites, as happens in the metastatic spread of
cancer. The question of whether cancerous cells that originate in one organ can migrate
to, adapt to, and persist within another organ is of manifest interest; related questions
arise in an ecological context. In such instances, continuous descriptions of space may
no longer be appropriate – the distance between two organs is not easily defined –
and formulations on a network may be more appropriate. Steps in this direction have
been made, by describing the dynamics of the phenotype density in each network node
with a non-local PDE of form (10), and adding sink/source terms for the migration
across adjacent edges. Assuming fitness functions in the form of (11)-(12), analyti-
cal results extend those outlined in Section 4.2.2 and highlight that spatial movement
— even in discrete space settings — may provide the substrate for polymorphism,
both under constant (Mirrahimi, 2013; Mirrahimi and Gandon, 2020) or phenotype-
dependent migration rates (Padovano and Villa, 2024). The long-term persistence
(or extinction) of phenotype-structured populations in such modelling framework was
investigated in Hamel et al. (2021); Alfaro et al. (2023), in the context of host-pathogen
interactions. Nevertheless, PS-PIDEs over networks currently neglect explicit spatial
dynamics within each node – with the exception of a graph-like description of the habi-
tat in each node (Boussange and Pellissier, 2022) – and the inclusion of continuous
spatial structures for node-specific dynamics is an open research avenue.
VIII. Development and analysis of numerical schemes. Relying on structuring
over both phenotype and physical space, PS-PIDE models necessitate discretisation
over multiple dimensions to be simulated. This aspect, coupled with the presence of
non-local and highly non-linear terms, often makes solving numerically the equations
comprised in these models prohibitively expensive, especially when high dimensional
phenotypic and physical domains are simultaneously considered. As such, a significant
challenge is posed when it comes to developing efficient algorithms implementing accu-
rate numerical schemes. As discussed in Section 4.3, approaches to date have typically
invoked semi-classical ideas (method of lines, finite difference, finite volume schemes,
etc), which benefit from a substantial literature and flexibility. However, whether
other approaches – such as pseudospectral methods (Fornberg, 1998), discontinuous
Galerkin methods (Cockburn et al., 2012), particle methods (Alvarez and Guilberteau,
2023), and deep-learning algorithms (Boussange et al., 2023) – could be used to gen-
erate more efficient algorithms is an intriguing possibility. Beyond the development
of efficient algorithms, systematic numerical analysis of discretisation schemes for PS-
PIDE models of cell movement of the type considered here is generally lacking in the
extant literature, which would provide valuable information on accuracy of numerical
solutions; this is certainly another avenue for future research.
IX. Bridging the gap between models and data. Recent technological advances
have made it possible to access a vast amount of data on the phenotypic properties
of cells, both at the single-cell level and across space (see Figure 1(c)), that could
be used to validate PS-PIDE models of collective cell migration. While some works
already leveraged proteomics data from bulk measurements, of the type shown in
47
panel (ii) of Figure 1(c), for parameter estimation in spatially homogeneous models of
phenotypically-structured cell population dynamics (Almeida et al., 2024; Celora et al.,
2023), this challenge is yet to be tackled in PS-PIDEs models of cell movement. Indeed
spatial data come at varying levels of resolution and may be more prone to stochastic
variation compared to bulk measurement data, making the task of PDE calibration
more involved. This raises the question of practical identifiability of parameters in PS-
PIDE models, which is bound to merge complexities found when addressing this in
spatially-structured phenotypically homogeneous populations (Liu et al., 2024) and in
well-mixed phenotype-structured populations (Browning et al., 2024).
Acknowledgements.
The authors would like to thank F.R. Macfarlane for her
help with Figure 6. TL and KJP are members of INdAM-GNFM. KJP acknowledges
“Miur-Dipartimento di Eccellenza” funding to the Dipartimento di Scienze, Progetto
e Politiche del Territorio (DIST). CV is a Fellow of the Paris Region Fellowship
Programme, supported by the Paris Region.
Funding.
TL gratefully acknowledges support from the Italian Ministry of Univer-
sity and Research (MUR) through the grant PRIN 2020 project (No. 2020JLWP23)
“Integrated Mathematical Approaches to Socio-Epidemiological Dynamics” (CUP:
E15F21005420006) and the grant PRIN2022-PNRR project (No. P2022Z7ZAJ) “A
Unitary Mathematical Framework for Modelling Muscular Dystrophies” (CUP:
E53D23018070001) funded by the European Union – NextGenerationEU. TL and
CV acknowledge also support from the CNRS International Research Project “Mod-
elisation de la biomecanique cellulaire et tissulaire” (MOCETIBI). This project has
received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innova-
tion programme under the Marie Sk lodowska-Curie grant agreement No 945298-
ParisRegionFP.
Competing interests.
The authors have no competing interests to declare that are
relevant to the content of this article.
Ethics approval.
Not applicable.
Consent for publication.
All authors have given approval for publication.
Data availability.
Not applicable.
Materials availability.
Not applicable.
Code availability.
Code is available upon request.
Author contributions.
All authors contributed equally to this work.
References
Almeida, L., Bagnerini, P., Fabrini, G., Hughes, B.D., Lorenzi, T.: Evolution of cancer
cell populations under cytotoxic therapy and treatment optimisation: insight from
a phenotype-structured model. ESAIM: Mathematical Modelling and Numerical
Analysis 53(4), 1157–1190 (2019)
48
Alfaro, M., Berestycki, H., Raoul, G.: The effect of climate shift on a species submit-
ted to dispersion, evolution, growth, and nonlocal competition. SIAM Journal on
Mathematical Analysis 49(1), 562–596 (2017)
Alfaro, M., Carles, R.: Explicit solutions for replicator-mutator equations: extinc-
tion versus acceleration. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 74(6), 1919–1934
(2014)
Alfaro, M., Carles, R.: Replicator-mutator equations with quadratic fitness. Proceed-
ings of the American Mathematical Society 145(12), 5315–5327 (2017)
Alfaro, M., Coville, J., Raoul, G.: Travelling waves in a nonlocal reaction-diffusion
equation as a model for a population structured by a space variable and a phenotypic
trait. Communications in Partial Differential Equations 38(12), 2126–2154 (2013)
Almeida, L., Denis, J.A., Ferrand, N., Lorenzi, T., Prunet, A., Sabbah, M., Villa, C.:
Evolutionary dynamics of glucose-deprived cancer cells: insights from experimentally
informed mathematical modelling. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 21(210),
20230587 (2024)
Arnold, A., Desvillettes, L., Pr´evost, C.: Existence of nontrivial steady states for pop-
ulations structured with respect to space and a continuous trait. Commun. Pure
Appl. Anal 11(1), 83–96 (2012)
Alvarez, F.E., Guilberteau, J.: A particle method for non-local advection-selection-
mutation equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14210 (2023)
Ardaˇseva, A., Gatenby, R.A., Anderson, A.R., Byrne, H.M., Maini, P.K., Lorenzi,
T.: Evolutionary dynamics of competing phenotype-structured populations in peri-
odically fluctuating environments. Journal of Mathematical Biology 80, 775–807
(2020)
Alfaro, M., Hamel, F., Patout, F., Roques, L.: Adaptation in a heterogeneous envi-
ronment II: To be three or not to be. Journal of Mathematical Biology 87(5), 68
(2023)
Ainseba, B., Langlais, M.: On a population dynamics control problem with age depen-
dence and spatial structure. Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications
248(2), 455–474 (2000)
Auger, P., Magal, P., Ruan, S.: Structured Population Models in Biology and
Epidemiology vol. 1936. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2008)
Al-Omari, J., Gourley, S.: Monotone travelling fronts in an age-structured reaction-
diffusion model of a single species. Journal of Mathematical Biology 45(4), 294–312
(2002)
49
Ambrosi, D., Preziosi, L.: On the closure of mass balance models for tumor growth.
Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied Sciences 12(05), 737–754 (2002)
Almeida, L., Perthame, B., Ruan, X.: An asymptotic preserving scheme for capturing
concentrations in age-structured models arising in adaptive dynamics. Journal of
Computational Physics 464, 111335 (2022)
Andrade-Restrepo, M., Champagnat, N., Ferri`ere, R.: Local adaptation, dispersal evo-
lution, and the spatial eco-evolutionary dynamics of invasion. Ecology letters 22(5),
767–777 (2019)
Arumugam, G., Tyagi, J.: Keller-Segel chemotaxis models: A review. Acta Applican-
dae Mathematicae 171, 1–82 (2021)
Alfaro, M., Veruete, M.: Evolutionary branching via replicator–mutator equations.
Journal of Dynamics and Differential Equations 31, 2029–2052 (2019)
Ayati, B.P., Webb, G.F., Anderson, A.R.: Computational methods and results for
structured multiscale models of tumor invasion. Multiscale Modeling & Simulation
5(1), 1–20 (2006)
Ayati, B.P.: A structured-population model of Proteus mirabilis swarm-colony devel-
opment. Journal of Mathematical Biology 52, 93–114 (2006)
Bell, G.I., Anderson, E.C.: Cell growth and division: I. A mathematical model
with applications to cell volume distributions in mammalian suspension cultures.
Biophysical Journal 7(4), 329–351 (1967)
Boussange, V., Becker, S., Jentzen, A., Kuckuck, B., Pellissier, L.: Deep learning
approximations for non-local nonlinear PDEs with Neumann boundary conditions.
Partial Differential Equations and Applications 4(6), 51 (2023)
Bellomo, N., Bellouquid, A., Tao, Y., Winkler, M.: Toward a mathematical theory of
Keller–Segel models of pattern formation in biological tissues. Mathematical Models
and Methods in Applied Sciences 25(09), 1663–1763 (2015)
Byrne, H., Chaplain, M.A.: Free boundary value problems associated with the
growth and development of multicellular spheroids. European Journal of Applied
Mathematics 8(6), 639–658 (1997)
Berestycki, H., Chapuisat, G.: Traveling fronts guided by the environment for reaction-
diffusion equations. Networks and Heterogeneous Media 8, 79–114 (2013)
Bouin, E., Calvez, V.: Travelling waves for the cane toads equation with bounded
traits. Nonlinearity 27(9), 2233 (2014)
Bresch, D., Colin, T., Grenier, E., Ribba, B., Saut, O.: Computational modeling of
solid tumor growth: the avascular stage. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing
50
32(4), 2321–2344 (2010)
Bouin, E., Calvez, V., Meunier, N., Mirrahimi, S., Perthame, B., Raoul, G., Voituriez,
R.: Invasion fronts with variable motility: phenotype selection, spatial sorting and
wave acceleration. Comptes Rendus. Math´ematique 350(15-16), 761–766 (2012)
B´enichou, O., Calvez, V., Meunier, N., Voituriez, R.: Front acceleration by dynamic
selection in fisher population waves. Physical Review E 86(4), 041908 (2012)
Browning, A.P., Crossley, R.M., Villa, C., Maini, P.K., Jenner, A.L., Cassidy, T.,
Hamis, S.: Identifiability of heterogeneous phenotype adaptation from low-cell-count
experiments and a stochastic model. bioRxiv, 2024–08 (2024)
Byrne, H., Drasdo, D.: Individual-based and continuum models of growing cell
populations: a comparison. Journal of Mathematical Biology 58, 657–687 (2009)
Bernardelli, H.: Population waves. Journal of the Burma Research Society 31, 3–18
(1941)
Barles, G., Evans, L.C., Souganidis, P.E.: Wavefront propagation for reaction-diffusion
systems of PDE (1990)
Bertsch, M., Hilhorst, D., Izuhara, H., Mimura, M., Wakasa, T.: Travelling wave
solutions of a parabolic-hyperbolic system for contact inhibition of cell-growth.
European Journal of Applied Mathematics 26(3), 297–323 (2015)
Bouin, E., Henderson, C., Ryzhik, L.: Super-linear spreading in local and non-local
cane toads equations. Journal de math´ematiques Pures et Appliqu´ees 108(5), 724–
750 (2017)
Bouin, E., Mirrahimi, S.: A Hamilton-Jacobi approach for a model of population
structured by space and trait. Communications in Mathematical Sciences 13(6),
1431–1452 (2015)
Barles, G., Mirrahimi, S., Perthame, B.: Concentration in Lotka-Volterra parabolic
or integral equations: a general convergence result. Methods and Applications of
Analysis 16(3), 321–340 (2009)
Berestycki, N., Mouhot, C., Raoul, G.: Existence of self-accelerating fronts for a non-
local reaction-diffusion equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.00903 (2015)
Berestycki, H., Nadin, G., Perthame, B., Ryzhik, L.: The non-local Fisher–KPP
equation: travelling waves and steady states. Nonlinearity 22(12), 2813 (2009)
Byrne, H., Preziosi, L.: Modelling solid tumour growth using the theory of mixtures.
Mathematical Medicine and Biology: a Journal of the IMA 20(4), 341–366 (2003)
Barles, G., Perthame, B.: Concentrations and constrained Hamilton-Jacobi equations
51
arising in adaptive dynamics. Contemporary Mathematics 439, 57–68 (2007)
Boussange, V., Pellissier, L.: Eco-evolutionary model on spatial graphs reveals how
habitat structure affects phenotypic differentiation. Communications Biology 5(1),
668 (2022)
Bubba, F., Perthame, B., Pouchol, C., Schmidtchen, M.: Hele-Shaw limit for a system
of two reaction-(cross-) diffusion equations for living tissues. Archive for Rational
Mechanics and Analysis 236(2), 735–766 (2020)
Boutillon, N., Rossi, L.: Reaction-diffusion model for a population structured in
phenotype and space i–criterion for persistence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.20118
(2024)
B¨urger, R.: The Mathematical Theory of Selection, Recombination, and Mutation.
John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK (2000)
Carter, S.B.: Principles of cell motility: the direction of cell movement and cancer
invasion. Nature 208, 1183–1187 (1965)
Caswell, H.: Matrix Population Models: Construction, Analysis, and Interpretation.
2nd Edn Sinauer Associates. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA (2001)
Celora, G.L., Byrne, H.M., Kevrekidis, P.: Spatio-temporal modelling of phenotypic
heterogeneity in tumour tissues and its impact on radiotherapy treatment. Journal
of Theoretical Biology 556, 111248 (2023)
Chiari, G., Delitala, M.E., Morselli, D., Scianna, M.: A hybrid modeling environment
to describe aggregates of cells heterogeneous for genotype and behavior with possible
phenotypic transitions. International Journal of Non-Linear Mechanics 144, 104063
(2022)
Crandall, M.G., Evans, L.C., Lions, P.-L.: Some properties of viscosity solutions of
Hamilton-Jacobi equations. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society
282(2), 487–502 (1984)
Ciarletta, P., Foret, L., Ben Amar, M.: The radial growth phase of malignant
melanoma: multi-phase modelling, numerical simulations and linear stability anal-
ysis. Journal of the Royal Society Interface 8(56), 345–368 (2011)
Chiari, G., Fiandaca, G., Delitala, M.E.: Hypoxia-related radiotherapy resistance in
tumours: treatment efficacy investigation in an eco-evolutionary perspective. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.10040 (2023)
Chiari, G., Fiandaca, G., Delitala, M.E.: Hypoxia-resistance heterogeneity in tumours:
the impact of geometrical characterization of environmental niches and evolu-
tionary trade-offs. a mathematical approach. Mathematical Modelling of Natural
52
Phenomena 18, 18 (2023)
Chaplain, M.A., Graziano, L., Preziosi, L.: Mathematical modelling of the loss of tissue
compression responsiveness and its role in solid tumour development. Mathematical
medicine and biology: a journal of the IMA 23(3), 197–229 (2006)
Charlesworth, B.: Evolution in Age-structured Populations vol. 2. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge (1994)
Calvez, V., Hivert, H., Yolda¸s, H.: Concentration in Lotka–Volterra parabolic
equations: an asymptotic-preserving scheme. Numerische Mathematik 154(1),
103–153 (2023)
Cockburn, B., Karniadakis, G.E., Shu, C.-W.: Discontinuous Galerkin Methods:
Theory, Computation and Applications vol. 11. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg (2012)
Crandall, M.G., Lions, P.-L.: Viscosity solutions of Hamilton-Jacobi equations.
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 277(1), 1–42 (1983)
Cho, H., Levy, D.: Modeling the chemotherapy-induced selection of drug-resistant
traits during tumor growth. Journal of Theoretical Biology 436, 120–134 (2018)
Chisholm, R.H., Lorenzi, T., Clairambault, J.: Cell population heterogeneity and evo-
lution towards drug resistance in cancer: biological and mathematical assessment,
theoretical treatment optimisation. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-General
Subjects 1860(11), 2627–2645 (2016)
Chisholm, R.H., Lorenzi, T., Desvillettes, L., Hughes, B.D.: Evolutionary dynamics of
phenotype-structured populations: from individual-level mechanisms to population-
level consequences. Zeitschrift f¨ur Angewandte Mathematik und Physik 67, 1–34
(2016)
Chisholm, R.H., Lorenzi, T., Lorz, A., Larsen, A.K., Almeida, L.N.d., Escargueil, A.,
Clairambault, J.: Emergence of drug tolerance in cancer cell populations: an evolu-
tionary outcome of selection, nongenetic instability, and stress-induced adaptation.
Cancer Research 75(6), 930–939 (2015)
Chisholm, R.H., Lorenzi, T., Lorz, A.: Effects of an advection term in nonlocal Lotka–
Volterra equations. Communications in Mathematical Sciences 14(4), 1181–1188
(2016)
Chaplain, M.A., Lorenzi, T., Macfarlane, F.R.: Bridging the gap between individual-
based and continuum models of growing cell populations. Journal of Mathematical
Biology 80, 343–371 (2020)
Champagnat, N., M´el´eard, S.: Invasion and adaptive evolution for individual-based
spatially structured populations. Journal of Mathematical Biology 55, 147–188
53
(2007)
Crossley, R.M., Painter, K.J., Lorenzi, T., Maini, P.K., Baker, R.E.: Phenotypic
switching mechanisms determine the structure of cell migration into extracellular
matrix under the ‘go-or-grow’hypothesis. Mathematical Biosciences, 109240 (2024)
Celi`a-Terrassa, T., Bastian, C., Liu, D.D., Ell, B., Aiello, N.M., Wei, Y., Zamalloa,
J., Blanco, A.M., Hang, X., Kunisky, D., et al.: Hysteresis control of epithelial-
mesenchymal transition dynamics conveys a distinct program with enhanced
metastatic ability. Nature Communications 9(1), 5005 (2018)
Cushing, J.M.: An Introduction to Structured Population Dynamics. SIAM, Philadel-
phia (1998)
Darcy, H.: Les Fontaines Publiques de la Ville de Dijon. V. Dalmont, Paris, 305-311
(1856)
David, N.: Phenotypic heterogeneity in a model of tumour growth: existence of solu-
tions and incompressible limit. Communications in Partial Differential Equations
48(4), 678–710 (2023)
Drasdo, D., Buttensch¨on, A., Van Liedekerke, P.: Agent-based lattice models of
multicellular systems: numerical methods, implementation, and applications. In:
Numerical Methods and Advanced Simulation in Biomechanics and Biological
Processes, pp. 223–238. Academic Press, New York (2018)
David, N., Debiec, T., Mandal, M., Schmidtchen, M.: A degenerate cross-diffusion
system as the inviscid limit of a nonlocal tissue growth model. SIAM Journal on
Mathematical Analysis 56(2), 2090–2114 (2024)
Drasdo, D., Hoehme, S.: Modeling the impact of granular embedding media, and
pulling versus pushing cells on growing cell clones. New Journal of Physics 14(5),
055025 (2012)
Diekmann, O.: A beginner’s guide to adaptive dynamics. Banach Center Publications
63, 47–86 (2004)
Diekmann, O., Jabin, P.-E., Mischler, S., Perthame, B.: The dynamics of adaptation:
an illuminating example and a Hamilton–Jacobi approach. Theoretical Population
Biology 67(4), 257–271 (2005)
Delgado, M., Molina-Becerra, M., Su´arez, A.: A nonlinear age-dependent model with
spatial diffusion. Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications 313(1), 366–
380 (2006)
David, N., Ruan, X.: An asymptotic preserving scheme for a tumor growth model
of porous medium type. ESAIM: Mathematical Modelling and Numerical Analysis
54
56(1), 121–150 (2022)
Drasdo, D.: Coarse graining in simulated cell populations. Advances in Complex
Systems 8(02n03), 319–363 (2005)
David, N., Schmidtchen, M.: On the incompressible limit for a tumour growth
model incorporating convective effects. Communications on Pure and Applied
Mathematics 77(5), 2613–2650 (2024)
Dyson, J., Sanchez, E., Villella-Bressan, R., Webb, G.F.: An age and spatially struc-
tured model of tumor invasion with haptotaxis. Discrete and Continuous Dynamical
Systems-B 8(1), 45–60 (2007)
Domschke, P., Trucu, D., Gerisch, A., Chaplain, M.A.: Structured models of cell migra-
tion incorporating molecular binding processes. Journal of Mathematical Biology
75, 1517–1561 (2017)
Durand, J.D.: The population statistics of China, AD 2–1953. Population Studies
13(3), 209–256 (1960)
Deng, K., Webb, G.F., Wu, Y.: Analysis of age and spatially dependent population
model: application to forest growth. Nonlinear Analysis: Real World Applications
56, 103164 (2020)
Eastman, A.E., Guo, S.: The palette of techniques for cell cycle analysis. FEBS Letters
594(13), 2084–2098 (2020)
Engwer, C., Hillen, T., Knappitsch, M., Surulescu, C.: Glioma follow white matter
tracts: a multiscale DTI-based model. Journal of Mathematical Biology 71, 551–582
(2015)
Elowitz, M.B., Levine, A.J., Siggia, E.D., Swain, P.S.: Stochastic gene expression in a
single cell. Science 297(5584), 1183–1186 (2002)
Erickson, C.A., Nuccitelli, R.: Embryonic fibroblast motility and orientation can be
influenced by physiological electric fields. Journal of Cell Biology 98(1), 296–307
(1984)
Erban, R., Othmer, H.G.: From individual to collective behavior in bacterial chemo-
taxis. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 65(2), 361–391 (2004)
Evans, L.C., Souganidis, P.E.: A PDE approach to geometric optics for certain semi-
linear parabolic equations. Indiana University Mathematics Journal 38(1), 141–172
(1989)
Engwer, C., Stinner, C., Surulescu, C.: On a structured multiscale model for acid-
mediated tumor invasion: the effects of adhesion and proliferation. Mathematical
Models and Methods in Applied Sciences 27(07), 1355–1390 (2017)
55
Eymard, R.: Finite volume methods. Handbook of Numerical Analysis 7, 713 (2000)
Fiandaca, G., Bernardi, S., Scianna, M., Delitala, M.E.: A phenotype-structured
model to reproduce the avascular growth of a tumor and its interaction with the
surrounding environment. Journal of Theoretical Biology 535, 110980 (2022)
Fiandaca, G., Delitala, M., Lorenzi, T.: A mathematical study of the influence
of hypoxia and acidity on the evolutionary dynamics of cancer. Bulletin of
Mathematical Biology 83(7), 83 (2021)
Fedotov, S., Iomin, A.: Migration and proliferation dichotomy in tumor-cell invasion.
Physical Review Letters 98(11), 118101 (2007)
Fick, A.: Ueber diffusion. Annalen der Physik 170(1), 59–86 (1855)
Figueroa Iglesias, S., Mirrahimi, S.: Long time evolutionary dynamics of pheno-
typically structured populations in time-periodic environments. SIAM Journal on
Mathematical Analysis 50(5), 5537–5568 (2018)
Fisher, R.A.: The wave of advance of advantageous genes. Annals of Eugenics 7(4),
355–369 (1937)
Fu, X., Kato, S., Long, J., Mattingly, H.H., He, C., Vural, D.C., Zucker, S.W., Emonet,
T.: Spatial self-organization resolves conflicts between individuality and collective
migration. Nature Communications 9(1), 2177 (2018)
Freingruber, V., Lorenzi, T., Painter, K.J., Ptashnyk, M.: Trait-structured chemotaxis:
Exploring ligand-receptor dynamics and travelling wave properties in a Keller-Segel
model. In preparation (2024)
Fontbona, J., M´el´eard, S.: Non local Lotka-Volterra system with cross-diffusion in an
heterogeneous medium. Journal of Mathematical Biology 70, 829–854 (2015)
Fitzgibbon, W.E., Morgan, J.J., Webb, G.F., Wu, Y.: A vector–host epidemic
model with spatial structure and age of infection. Nonlinear Analysis: Real World
Applications 41, 692–705 (2018)
Fornberg, B.: A Practical Guide to Pseudospectral Methods. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge (1998)
Fitzgibbon, W., Parrott, M., Webb, G.: A diffusive age-structured SEIRS epidemic
model. Methods and Applications of Analysis 3(3), 358–369 (1996)
Fredrickson, A.: A mathematical theory of age structure in sexual populations: random
mating and monogamous marriage models. Mathematical Biosciences 10(1-2), 117–
143 (1971)
Freidlin, M.I.: Geometric optics approach to reaction-diffusion equations. SIAM
56
Journal on Applied Mathematics 46(2), 222–232 (1986)
Friedman, A.: Free boundary problems in biology. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 373(2050),
20140368 (2015)
Fredrickson, A.G., Ramkrishna, D., Tsuchiya, H.M.: Statistics and dynamics of
procaryotic cell populations. Mathematical Biosciences 1(3), 327–374 (1967)
Fleming, W.H., Souganidis, P.E.: PDE-viscosity solution approach to some problems
of large deviations. Annali della Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa-Classe di Scienze
13(2), 171–192 (1986)
Fredrickson, A.G., Tsuchiya, H.: Continuous propagation of microorganisms. AIChE
Journal 9(4), 459–468 (1963)
Gatenby, R.A., Gawlinski, E.T.: The glycolytic phenotype in carcinogenesis and tumor
invasion: insights through mathematical models. Cancer Research 63(14), 3847–
3854 (2003)
Gandolfi, A., Iannelli, M., Marinoschi, G.: An age-structured model of epidermis
growth. Journal of Mathematical Biology 62, 111–141 (2011)
Guilberteau, J., Jain, P., Jolly, M.K., Duteil, N.P., Pouchol, C.: An integrative
phenotype-structured partial differential equation model for the population dynam-
ics of epithelial-mesenchymal transition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.09569 (2023)
Garroni, M.G., Langlais, M.: Age-dependent population diffusion with external
constraint. Journal of Mathematical Biology 14, 77–94 (1982)
Gurtin, M.E., MacCamy, R.C.: Non-linear age-dependent population dynamics.
Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis 54, 281–300 (1974)
Gurtin, M.E., MacCamy, R.C.: On the diffusion of biological populations. Mathemat-
ical Biosciences 33(1-2), 35–49 (1977)
Gurtin, M.E., MacCamy, R.C.: Diffusion models for age-structured populations.
Mathematical Biosciences 54(1-2), 49–59 (1981)
Gerlee, P., Nelander, S.: The impact of phenotypic switching on glioblastoma growth
and invasion. PLoS Computational Biology 8(6), 1002556 (2012)
Guilberteau, J., Pouchol, C., Duteil, N.P.: Long-time behaviour of an advection-
selection equation. Discrete and Continuous Dynamical Systems - B (2024)
Grimm, V., Railsback, S.F.: Individual-based Modeling and Ecology. Princeton
University Press, Princeton (2005)
57
Greenspan, H.P.: On the growth and stability of cell cultures and solid tumors. Journal
of Theoretical Biology 56(1), 229–242 (1976)
Gurtin, M.E.: A system of equations for age-dependent population diffusion. Journal
of Theoretical Biology 40(2), 389–392 (1973)
Gyllenberg, M.: Stability of a nonlinear age-dependent population model containing a
control variable. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 43(6), 1418–1438 (1983)
Halacy, D.S.: Census: 190 Years of Counting America. Elsevier/Nelson, New York
(1980)
Hu, Y., An, Q., Sheu, K., Trejo, B., Fan, S., Guo, Y.: Single cell multi-omics technol-
ogy: methodology and application. Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology 6,
28 (2018)
Hodgkinson, A., Chaplain, M.A., Domschke, P., Trucu, D.: Computational approaches
and analysis for a spatio-structural-temporal invasive carcinoma model. Bulletin of
Mathematical Biology 80, 701–737 (2018)
Hodgkinson, A., Le Cam, L., Trucu, D., Radulescu, O.: Spatio-genetic and phenotypic
modelling elucidates resistance and re-sensitisation to treatment in heterogeneous
melanoma. Journal of Theoretical Biology 466, 84–105 (2019)
Hao, W., Lam, K.-Y., Lou, Y.: Concentration phenomena in an integro-PDE model for
evolution of conditional dispersal. Indiana University Mathematics Journal 68(3),
881–923 (2019)
Hamel, F., Lavigne, F., Roques, L.: Adaptation in a heterogeneous environment I:
persistence versus extinction. Journal of Mathematical Biology 83, 1–42 (2021)
Hoppenstaedt, F.: Mathematical Theories of Populations: Demographics, Genetics and
Epidemics. SIAM, Philadelphia (1975)
Horstmann, D.: From 1970 until present: the Keller-Segel model in chemotaxis and its
consequences (2003)
Hillen, T., Painter, K.J.: A user’s guide to PDE models for chemotaxis. Journal of
Mathematical Biology 58(1-2), 183–217 (2009)
Hughes, B.D.: Random Walks and Random Environments. Oxford University Press,
Oxford (1996)
Hodgkinson, A., Uz´e, G., Radulescu, O., Trucu, D.: Signal propagation in sensing and
reciprocating cellular systems with spatial and structural heterogeneity. Bulletin of
mathematical biology 80, 1900–1936 (2018)
58
Hundsdorfer, W.H., Verwer, J.G.: Numerical Solution of Time-dependent Advection-
Diffusion-Reaction Equations. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2003)
Irwin, J.O.: The place of mathematics in medical and biological statistics. Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society 126, 1–41 (1963)
Jacquemet, G., Carisey, A.F., Hamidi, H., Henriques, R., Leterrier, C.: The cell biolo-
gist’s guide to super-resolution microscopy. Journal of Cell Science 133(11), 240713
(2020)
Jennings, H.S.: Heredity, variation and evolution in protozoa. II. Heredity and varia-
tion of size and form in Paramecium, with studies of growth, environmental action
and selection. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 47(190), 393–546
(1908)
Johannsen, W.: The genotype conception of heredity. The American Naturalist
45(531), 129–159 (1911)
Jabin, P.-E., Schram, R.S.: Selection-Mutation dynamics with spatial dependence.
Journal de Math´ematiques Pures et Appliqu´ees (2023)
Keegstra, J.M., Carrara, F., Stocker, R.: The ecological roles of bacterial chemotaxis.
Nature Reviews Microbiology 20(8), 491–504 (2022)
Kendall, D.G.: Stochastic processes and population growth. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society. Series B. 11(2), 230–282 (1949)
Keyfitz, N.: The mathematics of sex and marriage. In: Proceedings of the Sixth
Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, vol. 4, pp. 89–108
(1972). University of California Press Berkeley
Kolbe, N., Katuchova, J., Sfakianakis, N., Hellmann, N., Lukacova-Medvidova, M.:
Numerical study of cancer cell invasion dynamics using adaptive mesh refinement:
the urokinase model. Applied Mathematics and Computation 273 (2014)
Kermack, W.O., McKendrick, A.G.: A contribution to the mathematical theory of
epidemics. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A. 115(772), 700–721
(1927)
Kot, M.: Elements of Mathematical Ecology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
(2001)
Kolmogorov, A.N., Petrovskii, I., Piskunov, N.: A study of the equation of diffusion
with increase in the quantity of matter, and its application to a biological problem.
Moscow University Bulletin of Mathematics 1, 1–25 (1937)
Kim, I.C., Perthame, B., Souganidis, P.E.: Free boundary problems for tumor growth:
a viscosity solutions approach. Nonlinear Analysis 138, 207–228 (2016)
59
Kang, H., Ruan, S.: Nonlinear age-structured population models with nonlocal dif-
fusion and nonlocal boundary conditions. Journal of Differential Equations 278,
430–462 (2021)
Keller, E.F., Segel, L.A.: Initiation of slime mold aggregation viewed as an instability.
Journal of Theoretical Biology 26(3), 399–415 (1970)
Keller, E.F., Segel, L.A.: Model for chemotaxis. Journal of Theoretical Biology 30(2),
225–234 (1971)
Keller, E.F., Segel, L.A.: Traveling bands of chemotactic bacteria: a theoretical
analysis. Journal of Theoretical Biology 30(2), 235–248 (1971)
Kolbe, N., Sfakianakis, N.: An adaptive rectangular mesh administration and refine-
ment technique with application in cancer invasion models. Journal of Computa-
tional and Applied Mathematics 416, 114442 (2022)
Lam, K.-Y.: Dirac-concentrations in an integro-PDE model from evolutionary game
theory. Discrete & Continuous Dynamical Systems-B 22(11) (2017)
Langlais, M.: A nonlinear problem in age-dependent population diffusion. SIAM
Journal on Mathematical Analysis 16(3), 510–529 (1985)
Lorenzi, T., Chisholm, R.H., Clairambault, J.: Tracking the evolution of cancer cell
populations through the mathematical lens of phenotype-structured equations.
Biology Direct 11, 1–17 (2016)
Lorenzi, T., Chisholm, R.H., Desvillettes, L., Hughes, B.D.: Dissecting the dynamics
of epigenetic changes in phenotype-structured populations exposed to fluctuating
environments. Journal of Theoretical Biology 386, 166–176 (2015)
Li, Q., Chen, X., Lam, K.-Y., Wu, Y.: Propagation phenomena for a nonlocal reaction-
diffusion model with bounded phenotypic traits. Journal of Differential Equations
411, 794–822 (2024)
Leman, H.: Convergence of an infinite dimensional stochastic process to a spa-
tially structured trait substitution sequence. Stochastics and Partial Differential
Equations: Analysis and Computations 4, 791–826 (2016)
Leslie, P.H.: On the use of matrices in certain population mathematics. Biometrika
33(3), 183–212 (1945)
Lowengrub, J.S., Frieboes, H.B., Jin, F., Chuang, Y.-L., Li, X., Macklin, P., Wise,
S.M., Cristini, V.: Nonlinear modelling of cancer: bridging the gap between cells
and tumours. Nonlinearity 23(1), 1 (2009)
Lieberman, M., Glaser, L.: Density-dependent regulation of cell growth: an example
of a cell-cell recognition phenomenon. The Journal of Membrane Biology 63, 1–11
60
(1981)
Lions, P.-L.: Generalized Solutions of Hamilton-Jacobi Equations. Pitman, London
(1982)
Lam, K.-Y., Lou, Y.: An integro-PDE model for evolution of random dispersal. Journal
of Functional Analysis 272(5), 1755–1790 (2017)
Lorz, A., Lorenzi, T., Clairambault, J., Escargueil, A., Perthame, B.: Modeling the
effects of space structure and combination therapies on phenotypic heterogeneity
and drug resistance in solid tumors. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 77, 1–22
(2015)
Lorz, A., Lorenzi, T., Hochberg, M.E., Clairambault, J., Perthame, B.: Popula-
tional adaptive evolution, chemotherapeutic resistance and multiple anti-cancer
therapies. ESAIM: Mathematical Modelling and Numerical Analysis-Mod´elisation
Math´ematique et Analyse Num´erique 47(2), 377–399 (2013)
Lorenzi, T., Lorz, A., Perthame, B.: On interfaces between cell populations with
different mobilities. Kinetic and Related Models 10(1), 299–311 (2017)
Lorz, A., Mirrahimi, S., Perthame, B.: Dirac mass dynamics in multidimensional non-
local parabolic equations. Communications in Partial Differential Equations 36(6),
1071–1098 (2011)
Lorenzi, T., Macfarlane, F.R., Painter, K.J.: Derivation and travelling wave analysis
of phenotype-structured haptotaxis models of cancer invasion. European Journal of
Applied Mathematics, 1–33 (2023)
Lotka, A.J.: Relation between birth rates and death rates. Science 26(653), 21–22
(1907)
Lotka, A.J.: Studies on the mode of growth of material aggregates. American Journal
of Science 24(141), 199 (1907)
Lorenzi, T., Pouchol, C.: Asymptotic analysis of selection-mutation models in the
presence of multiple fitness peaks. Nonlinearity 33(11), 5791 (2020)
Lorenzi, T., Painter, K.J.: Trade-offs between chemotaxis and proliferation shape
the phenotypic structuring of invading waves. International Journal of Non-Linear
Mechanics 139, 103885 (2022)
Lorenzi, T., Perthame, B., Ruan, X.: Invasion fronts and adaptive dynamics in a model
for the growth of cell populations with heterogeneous mobility. European Journal
of Applied Mathematics 33(4), 766–783 (2022)
Lorz, A., Perthame, B., Taing, C.: Dirac concentrations in a chemostat model of
adaptive evolution. Chinese Annals of Mathematics, Series B 38, 513–538 (2017)
61
Liu, Y., Suh, K., Maini, P.K., Cohen, D.J., Baker, R.E.: Parameter identifiability and
model selection for partial differential equation models of cell invasion. Journal of
the Royal Society Interface 21(212), 20230607 (2024)
Lorenzi, T., Venkataraman, C., Lorz, A., Chaplain, M.A.: The role of spatial variations
of abiotic factors in mediating intratumour phenotypic heterogeneity. Journal of
Theoretical Biology 451, 101–110 (2018)
Lo, C.-M., Wang, H.-B., Dembo, M., Wang, Y.-l.: Cell movement is guided by the
rigidity of the substrate. Biophysical Journal 79(1), 144–152 (2000)
Malthus, T.R.: An Essay on the Principle of Population, as It Affects the Future
Improvement of Society. With Remarks on the Speculations of Mr. Godwin, M.
Condorcet and other Writers. J. Johnson, London (1798)
Mirrahimi, S., Barles, G., Perthame, B., Souganidis, P.E.: A singular Hamilton–Jacobi
equation modeling the tail problem. SIAM Journal on Mathematical Analysis 44(6),
4297–4319 (2012)
McKendrick, A.G.: Applications of mathematics to medical problems. Proceedings of
the Edinburgh Mathematical Society 13(141), 98–130 (1926)
Metz, J.A., Diekmann, O.: The Dynamics of Physiologically Structured Populations
vol. 68. Springer, Berlin, Hedelberg (1986)
Mattingly, H.H., Emonet, T.: Collective behavior and nongenetic inheritance allow
bacterial populations to adapt to changing environments. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 119(26), 2117377119 (2022)
Mirrahimi, S., Gandon, S.: Evolution of specialization in heterogeneous environments:
equilibrium between selection, mutation and migration. Genetics 214(2), 479–491
(2020)
Mirrahimi, S.: Adaptation and migration of a population between patches. Discrete &
Continuous Dynamical Systems - Series B 18(3), 753–768 (2013)
Macfarlane, F.R., Lorenzi, T., Painter, K.J.: The impact of phenotypic heterogene-
ity on chemotactic self-organisation. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 84(12), 143
(2022)
Mirrahimi, S., Perthame, B.: Asymptotic analysis of a selection model with space.
Journal de Math´ematiques Pures et Appliqu´ees 104(6), 1108–1118 (2015)
Mellet, A., Perthame, B., Quir´os, F.: A Hele–Shaw problem for tumor growth. Journal
of Functional Analysis 273(10), 3061–3093 (2017)
Mirrahimi, S., Perthame, B., Souganidis, P.E.: Time fluctuations in a population model
of adaptive dynamics. In: Annales de l’IHP Analyse Non Lin´eaire, vol. 32, pp. 41–58
62
(2015)
Macfarlane, F.R., Ruan, X., Lorenzi, T.: Individual-based and continuum models of
phenotypically heterogeneous growing cell populations. AIMS Bioengineering 9(1),
68–92 (2022)
McLennan, R., Schumacher, L.J., Morrison, J.A., Teddy, J.M., Ridenour, D.A., Box,
A.C., Semerad, C.L., Li, H., McDowell, W., Kay, D., et al.: Neural crest migration is
driven by a few trailblazer cells with a unique molecular signature narrowly confined
to the invasive front. Development 142(11), 2014–2025 (2015)
Murray, J.D.: Mathematical Biology: II: Spatial Models and Biomedical Applications
vol. 18. Springer, New York (2003)
Metzcar, J., Wang, Y., Heiland, R., Macklin, P.: A review of cell-based computational
modeling in cancer biology. JCO Clinical Cancer Informatics 2, 1–13 (2019)
Ni, B., Colin, R., Link, H., Endres, R.G., Sourjik, V.: Growth-rate dependent resource
investment in bacterial motile behavior quantitatively follows potential benefit of
chemotaxis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117(1), 595–601
(2020)
Nieto, M.A., Huang, R.Y.-J., Jackson, R.A., Thiery, J.P.: EMT: 2016. Cell 166(1),
21–45 (2016)
Nordmann, S., Perthame, B., Taing, C.: Dynamics of concentration in a population
model structured by age and a phenotypical trait. Acta Applicandae Mathematicae
155, 197–225 (2018)
ONS:
Office
for
National
Statistics.
Accessed
3/10/2024
(Archived
content,
28/01/2016). https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/ukgwa/20160128181439/
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/guide-method/census/2011/census-history/
200-years-of-the-census/1801-1901/index.html
Painter, K.J.: Continuous models for cell migration in tissues and applications to cell
sorting via differential chemotaxis. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology 71, 1117–1147
(2009)
Painter, K.J.: Mathematical models for chemotaxis and their applications in self-
organisation phenomena. Journal of Theoretical Biology 481, 162–182 (2019)
Patlak, C.S.: Random walk with persistence and external bias. The Bulletin of
Mathematical Biophysics 15, 311–338 (1953)
Perthame, B., Barles, G.: Dirac concentrations in lotka-volterra parabolic pdes.
Indiana University Mathematics Journal, 3275–3301 (2008)
Pham, K., Chauviere, A., Hatzikirou, H., Li, X., Byrne, H.M., Cristini, V., Lowengrub,
63
J.: Density-dependent quiescence in glioma invasion: instability in a simple reaction–
diffusion model for the migration/proliferation dichotomy. Journal of Biological
Dynamics 6, 54–71 (2012)
Perthame, B.: Transport Equations in Biology. Birkh¨auser Verlag, Basel, Boston,
Berlin (2006)
Perthame, B.: Some mathematical aspects of tumor growth and therapy. In: ICM
2014-International Congress of Mathematicians (2014)
Perthame, B.: Parabolic Equations in Biology. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2015)
Pfeffer, W.H.: Locomotorische richtungsbewegungen durch chemische reize. Unters.
Bot. Inst. T¨ubingen 1, 363–482 (1884)
Painter, K.J., Hillen, T., Potts, J.R.: Biological modelling with nonlocal advection
diffusion equations. Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied Sciences 34,
57–107 (2024)
Phan, T.V., Mattingly, H.H., Vo, L., Marvin, J.S., Looger, L.L., Emonet, T.: Direct
measurement of dynamic attractant gradients reveals breakdown of the Patlak–
Keller–Segel chemotaxis model. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
121(3), 2309251121 (2024)
Perthame, B., Quir´os, F., V´azquez, J.L.: The Hele–Shaw asymptotics for mechanical
models of tumor growth. Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis 212, 93–127
(2014)
Preziosi, L., Tosin, A.: Multiphase modelling of tumour growth and extracellular
matrix interaction: mathematical tools and applications. Journal of Mathematical
Biology 58, 625–656 (2009)
Padovano, F., Villa, C.: The development of drug resistance in metastatic tumours
under chemotherapy: an evolutionary perspective. Journal of Theoretical Biology,
111957 (2024)
Ranft, J., Basan, M., Elgeti, J., Joanny, J.-F., Prost, J., J¨ulicher, F.: Fluidization
of tissues by cell division and apoptosis. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 107(49), 20863–20868 (2010)
Roose, T., Chapman, S.J., Maini, P.K.: Mathematical models of avascular tumor
growth. SIAM review 49(2), 179–208 (2007)
Rice, S.H.: Evolutionary Theory: Mathematical and Conceptual Foundations. Sinauer
Associates, Sunderland, Massachusetts, USA (2004)
Rubinow, S.I.: A maturity-time representation for cell populations. Biophysical
Journal 8(10), 1055–1073 (1968)
64
Schreiber, F., Ackermann, M.: Environmental drivers of metabolic heterogeneity in
clonal microbial populations. Current Opinion in Biotechnology 62, 202–211 (2020)
Specht, E.A., Braselmann, E., Palmer, A.E.: A critical and comparative review of
fluorescent tools for live-cell imaging. Annual Review of Physiology 79, 93–117
(2017)
Sherratt, J.A., Chaplain, M.A.: A new mathematical model for avascular tumour
growth. Journal of Mathematical Biology 43(4), 291–312 (2001)
Sfakianakis, N., Chaplain, M.A.: Mathematical modelling of cancer invasion: a review.
In: International Conference by Center for Mathematical Modeling and Data
Science, Osaka University, pp. 153–172 (2020). Springer
Salek, M.M., Carrara, F., Fernandez, V., Guasto, J.S., Stocker, R.: Bacterial
chemotaxis in a microfluidic T-maze reveals strong phenotypic heterogeneity in
chemotactic sensitivity. Nature Communications 10(1), 1877 (2019)
Strobl, M.A., Krause, A.L., Damaghi, M., Gillies, R., Anderson, A.R., Maini, P.K.: Mix
and match: phenotypic coexistence as a key facilitator of cancer invasion. Bulletin
of Mathematical Biology 82, 1–26 (2020)
Sharpe, F.R., Lotka, A.J.: A problem in age-distribution. The London, Edinburgh, and
Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 21(124), 435–438 (1911)
Spencer, H.: The Principles of Biology: Volume 1. Williams and Norgate, London
(1864)
Scherbaum, O., Rasch, G.: Cell size distribution and single cell growth in Tetrahy-
mena pyriformis GL. Acta Pathologica Microbiologica Scandinavica 41(2), 161–182
(1957)
Stepien, T.L., Rutter, E.M., Kuang, Y.: Traveling waves of a go-or-grow model of
glioma growth. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 78(3), 1778–1801 (2018)
Sinko, J.W., Streifer, W.: A new model for age-size structure of a population. Ecology
48(6), 910–918 (1967)
Shaya, O., Sprinzak, D.: From Notch signaling to fine-grained patterning: Modeling
meets experiments. Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 21(6), 732–739
(2011)
Tsai, T.Y.-C., Garner, R.M., Megason, S.G.: Adhesion-based self-organization in tis-
sue patterning. Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology 38(1), 349–374
(2022)
Theveneau, E., Linker, C.: Leaders in collective migration: are front cells really
endowed with a particular set of skills? F1000Research 6 (2017)
65
Tindall, M.J., Maini, P.K., Porter, S.L., Armitage, J.P.: Overview of mathematical
approaches used to model bacterial chemotaxis II: bacterial populations. Bulletin of
Mathematical Biology 70, 1570–1607 (2008)
Trucco, E.: Mathematical models for cellular systems. The von Foerster equation. part
II. The Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 27, 449–471 (1965)
Trucco, E.: Mathematical models for cellular systems. The von Foerster equation. Part
I. The Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 27, 285–304 (1965)
Turing, A.M.: The chemical basis of morphogenesis. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society 237, 37–72 (1952)
Turanova, O.: On a model of a population with variable motility. Mathematical Models
and Methods in Applied Sciences 25(10), 1961–2014 (2015)
Tang, M., Vauchelet, N., Cheddadi, I., Vignon-Clementel, I., Drasdo, D., Perthame, B.:
Composite waves for a cell population system modeling tumor growth and invasion.
Partial Differential Equations: Theory, Control and Approximation: In Honor of the
Scientific Heritage of Jacques-Louis Lions, 401–429 (2014)
Tam, W.L., Weinberg, R.A.: The epigenetics of epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity in
cancer. Nature Medicine 19(11), 1438–1449 (2013)
Tucker, S.L., Zimmerman, S.O.: A nonlinear model of population dynamics containing
an arbitrary number of continuous structure variables. SIAM Journal on Applied
Mathematics 48(3), 549–591 (1988)
Villa, C., Chaplain, M.A., Lorenzi, T.: Modeling the emergence of phenotypic het-
erogeneity in vascularized tumors. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 81(2),
434–453 (2021)
Villa, C., Chaplain, M.A., Lorenzi, T.: Evolutionary dynamics in vascularised tumours
under chemotherapy: Mathematical modelling, asymptotic analysis and numerical
simulations. Vietnam Journal of Mathematics 49, 143–167 (2021)
Verhulst, P.-F.: Notice sur la loi que la population suit dans son accroissement.
Correspondence Mathematique et Physique 10, 113–129 (1838)
Foerster, H.: Some remarks on changing populations. In: Stohlman, F. (ed.) The
Kinetics of Cellular Proliferation, pp. 382–407. Grune and Stratton, New York
(1959)
Von Foerster, H., Mora, P.M., Amiot, L.W.: Doomsday: Friday, 13 November, AD
2026: At this date human population will approach infinity if it grows as it has
grown in the last two millenia. Science 132, 1291–1295 (1960)
Van Leer, B.: Towards the ultimate conservative difference scheme. V. A second-order
66
sequel to Godunov’s method. Journal of Computational Physics 32(1), 101–136
(1979)
Van Liedekerke, P., Buttensch¨on, A., Drasdo, D.: Off-lattice agent-based models
for cell and tumor growth: numerical methods, implementation, and applications.
In: Numerical Methods and Advanced Simulation in Biomechanics and Biological
Processes, pp. 245–267. Academic Press, New York (2018)
Vilchez Mercedes, S.A., Bocci, F., Levine, H., Onuchic, J.N., Jolly, M.K., Wong, P.K.:
Decoding leader cells in collective cancer invasion. Nature Reviews Cancer 21(9),
592–604 (2021)
Vishwakarma, M., Thurakkal, B., Spatz, J.P., Das, T.: Dynamic heterogeneity influ-
ences the leader–follower dynamics during epithelial wound closure. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B 375(1807), 20190391 (2020)
Wang, Y.: A review on the qualitative behavior of solutions in some chemotaxis–
haptotaxis models of cancer invasion. Mathematics 8(9), 1464 (2020)
Wang, Z., Butner, J.D., Kerketta, R., Cristini, V., Deisboeck, T.S.: Simulating cancer
growth with multiscale agent-based modeling. In: Seminars in Cancer Biology, vol.
30, pp. 70–78 (2015). Elsevier
Webb, G.: Diffusive age-dependent population models and an application to genetics.
Mathematical Biosciences 61(1), 1–16 (1982)
Webb, G.F.: Theory of Nonlinear Age-dependent Population Dynamics. CRC Press,
Boca Raton (1985)
Webb, G.: Population models structured by age, size, and spatial position. In: Struc-
tured Population Models in Biology and Epidemiology, pp. 1–49. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg (2008)
Zadran, S., Arumugam, R., Herschman, H., Phelps, M.E., Levine, R.: Surprisal analy-
sis characterizes the free energy time course of cancer cells undergoing epithelial-to-
mesenchymal transition. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111(36),
13235–13240 (2014)
Zamberletti, P., Roques, L., Lavigne, F., Papa¨ıx, J.: Spatial heterogeneity alters the
trade-off between growth and dispersal during a range expansion (2022)
67
