Longitudinal photoacoustic monitoring of collagen 
evolution modulated by cancer-associated 
fibroblasts: simulation and experiment studies 
Jiayan Li 
Institute of Acoustics, School of 
Physics Science and Engineering 
Tongji University  
Shanghai, China 
1910791@tongji.edu.cn 
Wenxiang Zhi 
Department of Ultrasonography, Fudan 
University Shanghai Cancer Center 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan 
University 
Shanghai, China 
zwenx1123@163.com 
Lu Bai 
Department of Ultrasonography, Fudan 
University Shanghai Cancer Center 
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan 
University 
Shanghai, China 
22211230046@m.fudan.edu.cn 
Qian Cheng 
Institute of Acoustics, School of 
Physics Science and Engineering 
Tongji University  
Shanghai, China 
q.cheng@tongji.edu.cn
Junmei Cao 
Institute of Acoustics, School of 
Physics Science and Engineering  
Tongji University 
Shanghai, China 
1910756@tongji.edu.cn 
 
Abstract—Noninvasive in vivo detection of collagen 
facilitates the investigation of mechanisms by which cancer-
associated fibroblast (CAF) regulates the extracellular matrix. 
This study explored the feasibility of photoacoustic spectrum 
analysis (PASA) in identifying longitudinal changes of collagen 
modulated by CAFs using simulations and experiment studies. 
Optical and acoustic simulations in tissues were performed 
based on the histological slides of maximum cross-sections of 
murine 
malignancies 
to 
verify 
the 
effectiveness 
of 
photoacoustic (PA) detection system and the parameter 
“relative 
area 
of 
power 
spectrum 
density 
(APSD)”. 
Experiments were conducted on three groups of mouse models 
with incremental ratios of CAFs and breast cancer cells at 3 
continuous time points. Results discovered that the system 
configuration and APSD were capable of reflecting the 
evolution of collagen during cancer growth. Furthermore, 
cancers receiving a high dose of CAFs exhibited a suppressed 
collagen level. The presented methods show great potential for 
clinical translation of PASA in the field of cancer therapies 
targeting CAFs. 
Keywords—collagen, photoacoustic spectral analysis, cancer-
associated fibroblasts, breast cancer, extracellular matrix 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Cancer-associated fibroblast (CAF) is a major component 
of cancer stroma and performs various functions. Activation 
of CAFs occurs during cancer progression through multiple 
mechanisms, transiting them from a quiescent state. 
Activated CAFs can reorganize collagen fibers within the 
extracellular 
matrix 
(ECM), 
which 
maintains 
the 
homeostasis of the tumor microenvironment (TME). This 
process results in an elevation in tissue stiffness, leading to 
the growth of vasculature with increased permeability and 
accelerating the proliferation of cancer cells. Ongoing 
research is being conducted to create therapeutics that 
specifically target CAFs by investigating the clinical 
outcomes related to the quantity and impact of CAFs. CAF-
modulated ECM synthesis and remodeling can be detected in 
vivo using second harmonic generation imaging microscopy 
(SHIM) and shear wave imaging (SWI). However, the 
capabilities of SHIM and SWI are constrained by their 
shallow detection depth and lack of direct validation. 
The photoacoustic (PA) modality, which relies on the 
emission of ultrasonic signals by chromophores when 
subjected to pulsed light, holds significant potential for 
evaluating ECM. PA technology is predominantly dependent 
on the light absorption properties of biomacromolecules 
rather than on the optical phase, which explains its superior 
depth of detection compared to most optical detection 
methods. Photoacoustic spectral analysis (PASA) can 
characterize the molecular composition and cluster size in 
biological tissues. Wang et al. successfully diagnosed fatty 
and cirrhotic liver by examining the slope and midband-fit of 
the PA power spectrum [1]. Feng et al. quantitatively 
analyzed the bone microstructure and marrow chemical 
compositions by computing the weighted center frequency 
and power of PA signals [2]. As far as we know, only a few 
existing studies achieve long-term quantitative monitoring of 
breast cancer using PASA. Nevertheless, these researches 
did not establish a connection between the PA spectral 
features and molecular properties. 
Numerical modelling and simulation technologies greatly 
contribute to designing and confirming the effectiveness of 
innovative biomedical detection methods. They circumvent 
challenges caused by acquiring authentic biological 
specimens and ethical approvals. PA simulation entails two 
physical processes: the forwards propagation of light and the 
backwards spreading of ultrasound waves. The Monte Carlo 
method is widely regarded as the “gold standard” for light 
diffusion modelling. It considers photon scattering and 
absorption as random events and establishes probability 
distributions for the scattering angle and step size based on 
the optical characteristics of tissues. Besides, the k-Wave 
software is commonly employed in ultrasonic simulation of 
PA procedures due to its high computational efficiency, 
optimized memory requirements, and straightforward 
modelling techniques. It enables accurate and rapid 
computation of pressure fields in the time domain without 
being constrained by the geometry of acoustic sources. Yao 
et al. utilized a 3D hybrid model based on the anatomical and 
vascular knowledge of mouse brain to replicate the PA 
computed tomography [3]. Li et al. optimized a portable 
breast PA imaging system using 3D models derived from B-
scan ultrasound data of patients [4]. Therefore, the numerical 
simulation holds great potential for evaluating the 
performance of PASA approaches in monitoring the growth 
of collagen induced by carcinogenesis. 
This study explores the feasibility of PASA in 
longitudinal monitoring collagen evolution in murine breast 
cancers when treated with CAFs. Simulations were 
performed to investigate the distribution of light fluence in 
tissues and the propagation of PA signals based on models 
built from histological slides. Experiments were conducted 
on three groups of nude mouse cancers cultured from an 
incremental ratio of CAFs and cancer cells once the cancers 
reached average sizes of 8, 12, and 16 mm. 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
A. Animal models 
Female BALB/c nude mice aged four-weeks were 
randomly allocated into three equal groups of five mice each. 
1.5×106 MDA-MB-231 cells were combined with 0, 1.5×
106, 3.0×106 CAFs in a 200 μL 1:1 mixture of phosphate 
buffer solution with Matrigel. These three different cell 
blends were injected into the mammary glands of murine 
models. In vivo PA measurements were taken once the 
cancers reached 8 mm in diameter, defined as Day 1. 
Measurements were repeated on Days 8 and 18, when the 
average cancer diameters were 12 mm and 16 mm. Some 
mice were excluded from the experimental groups due to 
insufficient growth rate of cancer. Pentobarbital sodium (1%) 
was injected into the abdominal cavity of mice to induce 
unconsciousness during the testing process, which lasted 
around 30 minutes per animal. The study adhered to the 
regulations set by the Department of Laboratory Animal 
Science at Fudan University. 
B. In vivo PA experimental setup 
Figure 1(a) illustrates the in vivo PA experimental 
system. A pulsed laser of 1580 nm emitted by an optical 
parametric oscillator (Phocus Mobile, OPOTEK, Carlsbad, 
CA) was divided into two segments with an optical energy 
ratio of 1:9 and transformed into spots with a diameter of 1.5 
cm. The first beam exposed the blackbody to generate PA 
signals for calibrating laser energy levels changing with laser 
pulses and wavelengths. A 5 MHz ultrasonic transducer 
(V302, Immersion Transducers, Olympus Corp., Tokyo, 
Japan) collected the signals magnified by 35 dB using an 
amplifier (5073PR, Olympus Corp., Tokyo, Japan). The 
second laser beam, passing through a hole at the bottom of a 
small square acrylic container, focused on the cancer with a 
fluence of 25 mJ/cm2. To minimize the light attenuation 
caused by water, the distance between the top of cancers and 
the water surface was maintained at approximately 1 mm. 
The PA signals from cancers were detected by a needle 
hydrophone (HNC-1500, ONDA Corp., Sunnyvale, CA) 
after being increased by 35 dB using an amplifier (5072PR, 
Olympus Corp., Tokyo, Japan). Both amplified signals were 
captured by an oscilloscope (HDO6000, Teledyne Lecroy, 
USA) at a 2500 MHz sampling rate and 32 average times.  
 
C. Numerical simulations 
Light diffusion in tissues was simulated using the Monte 
Carlo approach in a MATLAB-integrated toolbox called 
MCmatlab. The PA detection setup defined a 3D square 
model consisting of air, water, normal tissues, and cancer, as 
shown in Figure 1(b). Each side of the model had a length 
of 55 mm, composed of 220 voxels. The malignancy was 
assumed to be a uniform sphere with diameters of 8 mm, 12 
mm, and 16 mm. Table Ⅰ depicts the optical properties of 
three biomacromolecules and two tissue types at 1580 nm, 
an absorption peak of collagen. Collagen, water, and lipids 
are the chromophores showing primary absorbance in the 
extended NIR window (1200–1700 nm). The 
aμ  of tissues 
were determined using linear spectral mixing: 
 
a
a,
.
[
( )]
[
]
( )
i
molecule
molecule
i molecule
i
μ λ
c
μ
λ
= 
 
(1) 
Where, the variable i represents either normal or malignant 
tissues, the variable molecule  interprets collagen, lipids, 
and water, and λ corresponds to a particular wavelength. 
molecule
c
 and 
,
a molecule
μ
 indicate the volume fractions and 
absorption 
coefficients 
of 
three 
biomacromolecules, 
respectively. Due to limited availability of data on mouse 
tissues, we relied on the characteristics of human breast and 
statistics of our earlier measurements [5]. The water content 
was considered to be 20% for normal tissues and 9% for 
malignant tissues, as determined by Shah et al [6]. The 
values for 
collagen
c
and 
lipid
c
 were defined as 5% and 8% in 
normal tissues, while 10% and 3% in malignancies. The 
sμ
of tissues were calculated from an estimation based on the 
FIGURE 2. Numerical simulation samples and PA parameter extraction. 
(a)-(c) Samples obtained from Masson’s trichome staining images of murine 
breast cancer models, showing relative collagen contents of 1%, 3%, and 
5%. (d) Representative PA signals. (e) Representative PA power spectral 
density and the parameter relative “area of power spectrum density 
(APSD)”. “mag.” stands for “magnitude”. 
FIGURE 1. Photoacoustic (PA) experiment setup and simulation settings. 
(a) In vivo PA detection system. (b) 3D model for light diffusion simulation 
in MCmatlab. (c) 2D model for PA signal propagation simulation in k-
Wave. 
Mie’s theory: 
 
s
0
1
(
)
1
b
λ
μ
a
g
λ
−
= −
 
(2) 
Where, g denotes anisotropy factor, and 
0λ is the reference 
wavelength, equaling to 600 nm. a and b  represents the 
scattering amplitude and power, being extracted from the 
study by Taroni et al [7]. A vertically incident beam was 
used as the optical source, directing towards the malignancy 
and focusing at the bottom of water layer, which had a spot 
of 15 mm diameter. 
TABLE I.  
OPTICAL PARAMETERS OF TISSUES AT 1580 NM 
Tissue 
Absorption 
coefficient, 
aμ (cm-1) 
Scattering 
coefficient, 
sμ (cm-1) 
Refractive 
index, n 
Anisotropy, 
g 
Normal 
1.23 
74.85 
1.40 
0.90 
Cancer 
2.49 
37.73 
1.40 
0.85 
Water 
9.74 
3.37 
1.33 
0.99 
Air 
0 
0 
1.00 
1.00 
Collagen 
6.59 
/ 
/ 
/ 
The production and propagation of PA signals was 
performed using the k-Wave toolbox, an open-source 
software in MATLAB 2021b. Figure 1(c) depicts the 
established 2D model through the largest vertical cross-
section of cancer. The model had a grid size of 0.125×
0.125 mm2 and incorporated the collagen distribution based 
on Masson’s trichome staining images. A medical picture 
processing 
software, 
Fiji 
ImageJ, 
was 
utilized 
to 
differentiate collagen from other cancer tissues under the 
guidance of skilled physicians. The collagen growth in 
cancers was mimicked by adjusting the positive-stained 
threshold of histological images. The obtained binary 
images of collagen are displayed in Figure 2(a)-(c) and 
used as simulation samples in k-Wave after being meshed. 
The relative collagen content, labelled on the top right 
corner of the figures, was determined by dividing the 
positive-stained area by the total cross-sectional area of 
cancer. The initial PA pressure 
0p was calculated from the 
photoenergy deposition using the following equation: 
 
0
a
( , )
Γ( )
( , ) ( , )
p r λ
r μ
r λ F r λ
=
 
(3) 
Where, r represents a spatial point, Γ is the Gruneisen 
parameter, and F symbolizes the light fluence. We assumed 
that Γ is constant, due to the fact that all of the PA sources 
studied in this study were water-based, which had close 
Gruneisen parameters. Table Ⅱ presents the acoustic 
properties of materials examined in this study, including 
sound velocity, density, and attenuation coefficients. The 
ultrasonic attenuation α  was determined by the acoustic 
frequency f , according to the power law equation shown 
below: 
 
0
y
α
α f
=
 
(4) 
Where, 
0
α refers to the prefactor, and y specifies the 
exponent. Two sensors were positioned approximately 1 
mm below the water surface and 1cm apart from the 
malignancy, replicating the actual conditions in PA 
measurements. 
TABLE II.  
ACOUSTIC PARAMETERS OF TISSUES 
Tissue 
Speed of 
sound (m/s) 
Density 
(kg/m3) 
Power law 
prefactor, 
0
α  
Power law 
exponent, 
y 
Normal 
1510 
1020 
0.75 
1.5 
Cancer 
1510 
1020 
0.75 
1.5 
Water 
1414 
1000 
0.00 
0.0 
Air 
340 
1.29 
1.60 
1.5 
Collagen 
1540 
1050 
0.75 
1.5 
D. PA signal processing 
In PASA, the collagen content in biological tissue was 
assessed using a semi-quantitative parameter called relative 
APSD, which indicated the power of PA signals. The 
extraction procedures were as follows: First, the PA signal 
(Figure 2(d)) was converted to power spectral density 
(Figure 2(e)) using Welch’s approach. Then, the density 
curve was integrated according to the subsequent equation: 
 
1
2
0
Relative 
( )d
/ A
f
λ
f
APSD
p f
f




= 




 
(5) 
Where, the power spectral density is represented as 
( )
p f , 
and 
0
A is a standardization coefficient. In simulations, 
0
A
was set to 10-4, while in experiments, it was 105. To reduce 
system noises, the integration was carried out within the 
frequency range of 
0f to 
1f . We established these bonds of 
integration as between 1 MHz and 4 MHz to align with our 
previous investigation of murine malignancies [5]. 
E. Statistical analysis 
The statistical data processing was performed using 
FIGURE 3. Numerical simulation results of the optical propagation. 
Distribution of (a) light fluence and (b) initial PA pressure within the
maximum cross-section of cancers. (c) Attenuation of the normalized 
fluence rate along the central vertical line of cancerous tissues. (d) 
Penetration depths of light in cancers of different sizes. 
FIGURE 4. Numerical simulation results of the PA parameter. (a)-(c) 
Relative APSDs increase significantly with the growth of cancers owning 
relative collagen contents of 1%, 3%, and 5%. (d)-(f) Correlation analysis 
between the relative APSDs and the positive-stained area (%) of Masson’s 
trichome staining images of cancers with diameters of 8 mm, 12 mm, and 16 
mm.  
GraphPad Prism 9.4.1. Attenuation of the optical fluence 
rate was determined by fitting to a one-phase exponential 
decay model. Relationship between the positive-stained area 
(%) of Masson’s trichome staining images and the relative 
APSDs was analyzed using simple linear regression. The 
slope R of the fitted line indicated the magnitude of linearity. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Simulation results 
Figure 3(a) shows the photoenergy distribution inside 
the vertical plane that passes through the center of 
malignancies. Observations revealed that light radiation of 
1580 nm diffused into cancerous tissues. The optical 
attenuation graph in Figure 3(c) shows an exponential drop 
in fluence along the middle vertical line of cancers (R2 ≈ 
0.99). Figure 3(b) demonstrates that collagen is the primary 
PA source within cancer. Figure 3(d) depicts the optical 
penetration depth. The photoenergy of a 1580 nm laser 
reduced to e-1 of its surface value at depths of 2.04, 2.34, and 
2.23 mm in cancers owning diameters of 8, 12, and 16 mm, 
respectively. When the diameters of cancers were almost 
equal to, but slightly smaller than the light spot, the depth of 
light 
penetration 
in 
tissues 
was 
maximized. 
The 
aforementioned findings demonstrated that collagen could 
produce more pronounced PA pressure compared to other 
cancerous tissues while exposed to an optical irradiation at 
1580 nm. Furthermore, the intensity of initial PA pressure 
diminished rapidly with increasing depths in tissues.  
Figure 4(a)-(c) illustrates that as cancer enlarges, there is 
a noticeable increase in the relative APSDs of samples. 
Disparities in data from two hydrophones at different 
orientations were not apparent. Figure 4(d)-(f) demonstrate a 
linear relationship between the relative collagen contents and 
relative APSDs at invariant cancer size. Moreover, the 
linearity increased with cancer growing. These findings 
indicated the APSD is a reliable PA parameter for measuring 
longitudinal 
collagen 
content 
changes. 
To 
improve 
simulation accuracy, we plan to acquire additional 
histological slides for modelling and adjust the shapes of 
malignancies according to their specific aspect ratio. 
Additionally, we will increase the number of cross-sections 
for each xenograft to construct a 3D model in k-Wave.  
B. Experiment results 
Figure 5(a)-(c) depict a representative cancer-bearing 
mouse at three continuous time points of PA detection, 
which shows a notable cancer expansion. Figure 5(d)-(f) 
reveal the relative APSDs calculated from in vivo PA 
experiments on three groups of mice grown with varying 
number ratios of breast cancer cells and CAFs. Despite 
sample variations, the average relative APSDs exhibited an 
increasing tendency for the CAFs (0.0×106) and CAFs (1.5
×106) groups, while showing a contrasting trend for the 
CAFs (3.0 × 106) group. The results suggested that an 
elevated proportion of CAFs and breast cancer cells might 
lead to the suppression of collagen production in 
comparison to the moderate ratios. In future work, extra 
time points will be set for continuous monitoring. Moreover, 
histological investigation will be performed at each time 
point on xenografts to precisely verify the collagen 
evolution modulated by CAFs. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the feasibility 
of using PASA to examine the longitudinal alterations in 
collagen contents of cancers affected by CAFs. Simulations 
utilized 
histological 
slides 
and 
cancer 
models 
of 
progressively enlarged size. In vivo PA experiments were 
implemented on animal models at three consecutive time 
points after cancers reached average diameters of 8 mm. A 
quantified PA parameter APSD was computed to 
characterize the biomacromolecular level. In conclusion, 
three discoveries were made. First, PASA demonstrated 
high sensitivity to subtle variations in collagen contents 
inside malignancies. Second, PASA provided a facile 
method to evaluate collagen evolution as cancer advanced. 
Third, CAF quantity played a crucial role in ECM 
remodeling. The aforementioned results indicated that CAF-
targeted therapy with PASA detection has potential for 
future clinical breast cancer therapeutics. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This project was supported by the National Natural 
Science Foundation of China (grant numbers 12034015 & 
62088101), the Program of Shanghai Academic Research 
Leader (grant number 21XD1403600), and the Shanghai 
Municipal Science and Technology Major Project (grant 
number 2021SHZDZX0100). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
G. Xu et al., “The Functional Pitch of an Organ: Quantification of 
Tissue Texture with Photoacoustic Spectrum Analysis,” Radiology, 
vol. 271, no. 1, pp. 248–254, Apr. 2014. 
[2] 
T. Feng et al., “Characterization of multi-biomarkers for bone health 
assessment based on photoacoustic physicochemical analysis 
method,” Photoacoustics, vol. 25, p. 100320, Mar. 2022. 
[3] 
Y. Tang and J. Yao, “3D Monte Carlo simulation of light distribution 
in mouse brain in quantitative photoacoustic computed tomography,” 
Quant. Imaging Med. Surg., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 1046–1059, Mar. 
2020,. 
[4] 
T. Han, M. Yang, F. Yang, L. Zhao, Y. Jiang, and C. Li, “A three-
dimensional modeling method for quantitative photoacoustic breast 
imaging with handheld probe,” Photoacoustics, vol. 21, p. 100222, 
Mar. 2021. 
[5] 
J. Li et al., “Molecular breast cancer subtype identification using 
photoacoustic spectral analysis and machine learning at the 
biomacromolecular level,” Photoacoustics, vol. 30, p. 100483, Apr. 
2023. 
[6] 
D. Grosenick, H. Wabnitz, K. T. Moesta, J. Mucke, P. M. Schlag, and 
H. Rinneberg, “Time-domain scanning optical mammography: II. 
Optical properties and tissue parameters of 87 carcinomas,” Phys. 
Med. Biol., vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2451–2468, Jun. 2005. 
[7] 
P. Taroni, A. Bassi, D. Comelli, A. Farina, R. Cubeddu, and A. 
Pifferi, “Diffuse optical spectroscopy of breast tissue extended to 
1100 nm,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 14, no. 5, p. 054030, 2009. 
FIGURE 5. In vivo experiment results. (a)-(c) Representative photographs 
of breast cancer-bearing mice at three time points for PA detection. (d)-(f) 
Longitudinal variation of relative APSDs of three murine malignancy groups
subjected to different ratios of CAFs and cancer cells. 
