Identifying Key Genes in Cancer Networks Using Persistent
Homology
Rodrigo Henrique Ramos1,2*, Yago Augusto Bardelotte1,
Cynthia de Oliveira Lage Ferreira1, Adenilso Simao1
1*University of S˜ao Paulo, Av. Trab. S˜ao Carlense, 400, S˜ao Carlos, 13566-590, S˜ao
Paulo, Brazil.
2Federal Institute of S˜ao Paulo, Estrada Municipal Paulo Eduardo de Almeida, S˜ao
Carlos, 13565-820, S˜ao Paulo, Brazil.
Abstract
Identifying driver genes is crucial for understanding oncogenesis and developing targeted cancer
therapies. Driver discovery methods using protein or pathway networks rely on traditional network
science measures, focusing on nodes, edges, or community metrics. These methods can overlook the
high-dimensional interactions that cancer genes have within cancer networks. This study presents a
novel method using Persistent Homology to analyze the role of driver genes in higher-order structures
within Cancer Consensus Networks derived from main cellular pathways. We integrate mutation
data from six cancer types and three biological functions: DNA Repair, Chromatin Organization,
and Programmed Cell Death. We systematically evaluated the impact of gene removal on topologi-
cal voids (β2 structures) within the Cancer Consensus Networks. Our results reveal that only known
driver genes and cancer-associated genes influence these structures, while passenger genes do not.
Although centrality measures alone proved insufficient to fully characterize impact genes, combin-
ing higher-order topological analysis with traditional network metrics can improve the precision of
distinguishing between drivers and passengers. This work shows that cancer genes play an impor-
tant role in higher-order structures, going beyond pairwise measures, and provides an approach to
distinguish drivers and cancer-associated genes from passenger genes.
Keywords: Topological Data Analysis, Persistent Homology, Cancer Genomics, Driver Genes, Pathways
Networks, Protein Networks
1 Introduction
Cancer research has advanced significantly with the advent of high-throughput genomic data and the
development of public databases. The availability of extensive genomic data has facilitated the devel-
opment of computational and statistical methods in various fields, including the identification of cancer
1
arXiv:2409.19115v1  [q-bio.MN]  27 Sep 2024
genes [1]. A major challenge in analysing mutation data lies in distinguishing between passenger and
driver mutations. Passengers are the result of random genetic alterations or evolutionary processes
and do not contribute to cancer development. In contrast, driver mutations are responsible for the
onset and progression of the disease, making them targets for therapeutic intervention and personalised
medicine [1, 2]. In this work, in addition to drivers and passengers, we also use the term “cancer-
associated genes” to refer to genes with publications associating them with cancer but are not present
in driver databases.
Protein-protein interaction networks (PPIN) and pathway networks are graph-based models rep-
resenting protein interactions within cells. PPIN encompasses the entire interactome, while pathway
networks represent specific biological functions, working as subsets of the interactome [3]. Numerous
computational approaches use the topology of PPIN and pathway networks to investigate cancer-related
phenomena, such as mutual exclusivity, and to identify driver genes [4–7].
Traditional network science measures mainly address individual nodes, communities, or the whole
network. Although powerful, traditional methods can overlook the topological and structural significance
of gene interactions between the node and community level. Given the limitations of traditional methods,
the Persistent Homology (PH), a tool from algebraic topology, offers a novel way to analyse complex
networks by capturing multi-dimensional features [8, 9]. This approach enables the identification of
higher-order structures in cancer networks, providing a deeper understanding of the roles that specific
genes play in the context of these structures.
The objective of this study is to employ PH to identify genes that form higher-order structures
within cancer networks derived from pathway networks and to explore their relationship with cancer. We
constructed Cancer Consensus Networks (CCNs) using data from six types of cancer and three major
biological functions: DNA Repair, Chromatin Organisation, and Programmed Cell Death. To evaluate
the impact of each gene on topological voids (β2 structures) within the CCNs, we systematically removed
individual nodes and analysed the resulting changes. We then examine the role of these impactful genes
in cancer.
Our findings reveal that every gene that affects β2 structures is either a known driver or a cancer-
associated gene, with the potential to be new drivers. The CCNs were constructed using mutated genes
from various types of cancer. Given that most mutations are passengers [2, 10], we emphasise that
removing passenger genes does not affect β2 structures. Furthermore, we evaluated these impactful genes
(known drivers or genes associated with cancer) using traditional network science measures, highlighting
how centrality metrics alone are insufficient to fully characterise them. Not all known drivers or cancer-
associated genes in the CCNs impact the formation of β2 structures. However, no passenger gene
has such an impact. Our method exhibits high precision with low to medium recall in distinguishing
between drivers, cancer-associated genes, and passengers. Integrating higher-order topological features
with traditional measures makes it possible to achieve a more comprehensive understanding of a gene’s
role in cancer, which can be applied to evaluate candidate driver genes.
This work is organised as follows. The next two sections, “Cancer Mutation Data and Reactome’s
Super Pathways” and “Persistence Homology”, present the theoretical background for developing this
research. The “Methods” section details the data pipeline and our use of PH to characterise genes in
2
CCNs. The “Results and Discussion” section explores the removal of genes from networks, its impact on
higher-order structures, and how drivers and cancer-associated genes play a critical role in it. Finally, we
end our paper with the concluding remarks. An appendix with formal PH definitions is also included.
2 Cancer Mutation Data and Reactome’s Super Pathways
Advancements in DNA sequencing technologies have led to the generation of extensive genomic data.
In the field of cancer research, databases such as the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC)
and the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) offer datasets containing gene and mutation data for various
types of cancer. Among the available datasets, the Mutation Annotation Format (MAF) is a commonly
used tab-delimited file that connects patient samples, genes, and mutations. Each patient has one or
more samples, each sample containing multiple genes linked to one or more mutations. The MAF file
is frequently utilised in exploratory and computational approaches to identify driver genes and study
patterns of mutual exclusivity [7, 11]. In this work, we used cancer data from TCGA. Since TCGA
deidentifies and anonymises all patient information, ethical approval was not required for this research.
Mutated genes in MAF files can be classified as either drivers or passengers. Drivers are genes whose
mutations are causally linked to cancer [1], with databases such as NCG [12] and IntOGen [13] offering
lists of well-established drivers. These databases update their lists as new evidence emerges regarding a
gene’s role in cancer. Passengers, on the other hand, are mutated genes present in the MAF file but are
not relevant to cancer [1]. Distinguishing between drivers and passengers remains a critical challenge in
cancer genomics [2], leading to the development of numerous computational methods to identify new
drivers [6]. In this paper, we consider the genes listed in these databases as “known drivers”, with high
confidence in their role in cancer. All other mutated genes can be passengers or cancer-associated genes
with the potential to be new drivers.
Pathways consist of sets of genes that collaborate to produce specific biological functions. As path-
ways are subsets of the entire PPIN, they are considerably smaller and provide meaningful information
on the biological roles of their genes [3]. Recent research comparing human PPINs from various databases
reveals substantial inconsistencies in their interactions and topological structures [14]. The same study
shows that subnetworks, including pathway networks, are more consistent across different PPINs. These
findings indicate that whole PPINs are incomplete and still evolving, with new interactions continu-
ously being discovered, validated, or invalidated. In contrast, interactions within well-known pathways,
such as those used in this study, are more established, making pathway networks a more reliable option
compared to whole PPINs [14].
The Reactome Knowledgebase (https://reactome.org) is an open access, peer-reviewed, expertly
curated database focused on biological pathways [15]. It offers a variety of online bioinformatics tools
designed for the analysis and visualisation of pathway-related data. Additionally, Reactome includes
a PPIN derived from its pathway networks [16]. In 2020, Reactome introduced “Super Pathways”, a
hierarchical organisation of pathways that begins with broad biological functions, such as Programmed
Cell Death, and extends into more detailed subcategories, such as Apoptosis and Regulated Necrosis
3
[17]. Reactome presents pathways as lists of genes, enabling the extraction of induced subgraphs from
a PPIN to create Super Pathways Networks (SPNs), a procedure we explain in the Methods section.
3 Persistence Homology
Topological data analysis (TDA) [18–20] is based on the principle that topology and geometry can be
utilised to derive both qualitative and quantitative insights about the underlying structure of data.
Topological methods rely on the definition of similarity or distance between data points, allowing
comparisons between data sets that may exist in different coordinate systems.
Persistent Homology (PH) [21], a method within TDA, examines the topological features of data
on various scales. PH identifies and quantifies the size and number of structures, such as connected
components, cycles, and voids, by constructing a corresponding topological space from the data. The
PH framework is built upon some fundamental concepts: simplicial complexes, filtrations, chains, and
boundaries. These concepts are formally defined and illustrated with examples in the appendix. In this
section, we provide an overview of PH and demonstrate its application in network analysis.
Typically PH is calculated over a point cloud, as exemplified in Figure 4 in the appendix. However,
PH can also be computed over a network by defining a metric space based on a distance matrix calculated
by pairwise distances between nodes. Figure 1 demonstrates this process. Figure 1-(A) shows a network
that resembles a dodecahedron, with 20 nodes and 30 edges. Figure 1-(B) shows a N × N distance
matrix calculated using the shortest path length between nodes. This matrix is the metric space used to
calculate PH. Figure 1-(C) presents the Persistence Barcode, a plot normally used to visualise structures
found during the PH. We will detail this in the next section.
Fig. 1 From network to persistence barcodes.
3.1 Persistence, Barcodes and Betti Numbers
PH identifies the topological structures within the data. During the filtration step (explained in the
appendix), structures are born at a given time and die at another. Significant structures persist longer
than noise structures and are meaningful for characterising the data. Persistence barcodes represent
the birth and death of topological structures across multiple scales. In Figure 1-(C), the bar colours
4
represent different dimensions: red bars indicate connected components, blue bars indicate cycles (2-
dimensional holes) and green bars indicate voids (3-dimensional holes). The X-axis of Figure 1-(C) shows
the passage of time, i.e., the filtration process. Twenty red bars appear at time 0, and 19 persist until
time 1, when the filtration process connects all loose connected components to one. This connection
occurs at time 1 because the edges in Figure 1-(A) weight 1. At time 1, the dodecahedron faces are
identified and persist for 1 tick of time. At time 2, a void is identified, representing the empty space
inside the dodecahedron network. In summary, PH successfully identified the topological structures in
Figure 1-(A), and the persistence barcode is a way to represent them.
Betti numbers quantify the topological features of a space. Specifically, the k-th Betti number βk
represents the number of k-dimensional holes in the data. β0 counts the number of connected compo-
nents, β1 counts the number of cycles, and β2 counts the number of voids. In Figure 1-(C), we have
β0 = 20, β1 = 11, and β2 = 1. As a polyhedron, the dodecahedron consists of 12 pentagonal faces. How-
ever, persistence homology identified only 11 cycles because not all faces contribute to distinct cycles.
The edges of the “missing” cycle are shared with adjacent cycles, thereby not forming an independent
cycle. Betti numbers provide a convenient method for quantifying the structures represented in Persis-
tence Barcodes. In this work, we focus on using Betti numbers rather than barcodes, as our primary
concern is the number of structures in the network and the impact individual genes have on them.
3.2 Persistence Homology in Cancer Studies
PH is an innovative tool in data science and has made contributions in many fields, such as network
science, physics, chemistry, biology, and medicine [22–27], thanks to its ability to analyse high-dimension
datasets and extract meaningful features from complex data.
In cancer studies, PH has been applied in various contexts, including image analysis, protein net-
works, gene expression networks, and point clouds. Specifically, PH has been used to evaluate prostate
cancer in order to improve the Gleason grading system by capturing structure features independently of
Gleason patterns. By computing topological representations of prostate cancer histopathology images,
PH demonstrates the ability to group these images into unique groups through a ranked persistence
vector. This method showed sensitivity to specific substructure groups within single Gleason patterns,
offering a higher granularity than existing measures. The topological representations generated by PH
could improve future approaches for better diagnosis and prognosis [28].
Furthermore, PH has been utilised in the study of protein interactions in the KEGG database to
inform cancer therapy by analysing the correlation between Betti numbers and patient survival [9]. In
the context of gene expression networks, PH has been employed to examine gene interactions, uncovering
structural features of the disease. It highlights significant deviations in the network topology between
cancerous and healthy cells, emphasising the importance of cycles in cancer cells and voids in healthy
cells [8].
Moreover, PH has been applied in tumour segmentation of Hematoxylin and Eosin stained histology
images to enhance computer-aided diagnosis systems. This approach segments tumours in whole-slide
5
images by analysing the degree of connectivity among nuclei through persistent homology profiles, out-
performing convolutional neural networks [29]. Lastly, PH has been used to characterise comparative
genomic hybridisation profiles in breast cancer, providing a deeper understanding of chromosome ampli-
fications and deletions in an individual’s genome. The results were aligned with previous studies and
distinguished between cancer recurrence frequencies in chemotherapy-treated and nontreated patient
populations, highlighting the potential of PH in genomic data analysis [30].
4 Methods
We selected three SPNs, Chromatin Organisation (CHR), DNA Repair (DNA), and Programmed Cell
Death (PCD), due to the roles these biological processes play in cancer development [31–33]. Further-
more, these networks exhibit a high proportion of known driver genes [34], making them suitable for
our study. Although other SPNs, such as Gene Expression and Signal Transduction, are also relevant to
cancer, their extensive size, comprising over a thousand nodes, renders them computationally infeasible
for analysis using the Vietoris-Rips complex in PH analysis due to the prohibitive combinatorial costs
involved.
The selected pathway networks represent the proteins and interactions present in normal and healthy
cells. To associate these networks with cancer, we created the CCNs using mutation data from six types
of cancer: Bladder, Breast, Head and Neck, Lung, Skin, and Stomach. Mutation data was obtained from
MAF files in a TCGA pancancer study [35]. Figure 2 shows the pipeline used in this work.
In the first step, we collected data from the Reactome PPIN and Reactome pathways. In the second
step, we adopted a method similar to our previous research [34], where we generated SPNs by extracting
induced subgraphs from the Reactome PPIN using gene sets linked to Super Pathways. The third phase
was conducted independently of the previous steps. We selected genes that were mutated in at least
four of the six MAF files corresponding to different types of cancer. Furthermore, we identified known
driver genes by considering the combined data from the intOGen [13] and NCG [12] driver databases.
Step four depends on steps two and three, since we use the selected mutated genes to extract induce
subnetworks from each SPN, creating three CCNs. We also identify genes in the CCNs that are known
drivers, represented in the plot as red nodes. The original SPNs for CHR, DNA and PCD contain 221,
300, and 206 nodes, respectively. Their corresponding CCNs reduced the nodes to 162 (73%), 233 (78%),
and 170 (83%). The number of driver genes in CHR, DNA, and PCD are 45, 46, and 26, respectively. In
particular, the consensus networks retained at least 93% of the original driver genes. Although the total
number of nodes in the consensus networks decreased by approximately 22% compared to the original
SPNs, the reduction in driver genes was only 7%.
The fifth step in Figure 2 summarises the analysis we performed to characterise nodes regarding
their topological role in higher-order structures. It begins by calculating the PH for each CCN and
recording the β2 value using the Vietoris-Rips complex [19]. In this work, we only focus on β2 impact,
since they are topologically more significant, are built using β1, and their removal can increase the
number of β1. In the example, the original CCN contains one cycle, formed by the nodes D, E, F, and
one void, formed by the nodes A, B, C, D. Following this initial characterisation of the network, we
6
Fig. 2 Data pipeline: We gather data from different databases to create Cancer Consensus Networks (CCNs), integrating
data from three main biological functions with cancer-specific information. After that, we analyse the topological role of
drivers and non-drivers in relation to their impact on higher-order structures.
systematically remove each node, one at a time, from the network and measure its impact on the β2
value compared to the original CCN.
In the figure’s example, removing node H creates three new connected components, but does not
affect any higher-order structures. H ’s impact can not be measured using PH, but can be measured by
traditional network science measures, as previously done in the context of SPN and drivers [34]. On the
other hand, removing node A barely affects the network by traditional measures, but it has a relevant
impact on higher-order structures. Node A removal destroys a void (β2) and creates a new cycle (β1).
Contrary to nodes H and A, node D significantly impacts both traditional measures and higher-order
structures.
The sixth and final step in Figure 2 illustrates the second analysis performed to characterise the
nodes. For each CCN, we calculate four centrality measures: degree, clustering, betweenness, and close-
ness. We then identify the position of the nodes that affected β2 in the initial analysis. This step aims
to compare the novel approach introduced in this paper, i.e., the impact of node on β2, with traditional
centrality measures.
7
5 Result and Discussion
The main objective of this work is to use PH to identify genes that form higher-order structures in
CCNs and explore their relationship to cancer. By applying our proposed methodology, we assess the
impact of each gene on the CCN’s β2 by individually removing nodes. Our results demonstrate that
every node impacting β2 structures is either a known driver or a gene associated with cancer, which
potentially represents new drivers. The CCNs are constructed using mutated genes from various types
of cancer. Given that most mutations are passengers [2, 10], we emphasise that removing passengers
does not affect β2 structures. In addition, we analyse these impactful genes (known drivers or cancer-
associated genes) using traditional network science measures and discuss how centrality measures alone
fail to fully capture them.
5.1 Impact on β2 by single node removal
We calculated the PH for each CCN, identifying two β2 structures in the CHR CCN, four β2 structures
in the DNA CCN, and ten β2 structures in the PCD CCN. The PCD CCN, despite being the smallest
network, exhibited the highest complexity in higher-order structures. Table 1 lists every gene that
impacts β2 structures in each CCN, highlighting in bold known drivers.
Table 1 Impact on β2 structures by single node removal. Bold names are known drivers.
CCN
β2 Impact
GENES
CHR
-1
ACTL6A, BRMS1, RELA, SMARCE1, WDR77
DNA
-1
ATM, EP300
DNA
-2
ABL1, ACTL6A, ATR, FANCD2, HERC2, KAT5, PCNA, POLN,
RAD51, XPA, XRCC6
PCD
-1
AKT1, APAF1, BAD, BIRC2, CASP1, CTNNB1, MAPT, RIPK1,
ROCK1, STAT3, STUB1, TNFSF10
PCD
-2
HSP90AA1N, PTK2
PCD
-3
CASP3, CASP6, CASP8
PCD
-5
TP53
CHR CCN is the least complex network, with five genes destroying one β2 structure. In the DNA
CCN, most impacting genes affected two β2 structures. The PCD CCN, the most complex network,
exhibited a different pattern, with the majority of impacting genes affecting only one β2 structure. Five
of the six genes that impacted more than one β2 structure are known drivers. In particular, TP53, one of
the most well-known genes in cancer research and frequently mutated across various types of cancer [36],
stands out for its ability to independently destroy five β2 structures. Most of the known drivers in the
analysed CCNs did not impact β2 structures. We hypothesise that these genes may be involved in even
higher-dimensional structures, beyond β2. However, the exponential computational cost of performing
Vietoris-Rips filtration restricts such an analysis. This limitation suggests an avenue for future research
to develop a filtration method specific to cancer networks that could reduce computational costs and
enable the exploration of these higher-dimensional structures.
Table 1 lists 35 unique genes, of which 20 are identified as known drivers according to the combined
data from the NCG and IntOGen databases. Table 2, details these 35 impacting genes anWe provide
8
the most recent publications for genes not found in driver databases, and the most recent publications
associating them with cancer. In particular, all 15 genes not found in drivers database are drug targets
or related to cancer.
Table 2 All 35 genes impacting β2 structures in CCNs. 20 are known drivers listed in the
NCG or IntOGen databases. The Literature column presents the most recent publication
associating the remaining 15 genes with cancer.
Gene
NCG
IntOGen
Literature
ABL1
X
X
ACTL6A
-
-
Association with Squamous Cell Carcinoma [37]
AKT1
X
X
APAF1
-
-
Melona drug target [38]
ATM
X
X
ATR
X
X
BAD
-
-
Association with Triple-negative breast cancer [39]
BIRC2
-
-
Head and Neck drug target [40]
BRMS1
-
-
Metastasis suppressor in breast cancer [41]
CASP1
-
-
Association with Acute Myeloid Leukemia [42]
CASP3
X
-
CASP6
-
-
Association with Pancreatic cancer [43]
CASP8
X
X
CTNNB1
X
X
EP300
X
X
FANCD2
X
X
HERC2
X
-
HSP90AA1
-
X
KAT5
-
-
Association with Hepatocellular carcinoma [44]
MAPT
-
-
Association in Pan-Cancer [45]
PCNA
-
-
Drug target in multiple cancers [46]
POLN
-
-
Association in Nasopharyngeal carcinoma [47]
PTK2
X
-
RAD51
-
-
Potential therapeutic target [48]
RELA
X
X
RIPK1
X
X
ROCK1
-
-
Association with Cancreatic cancer [49]
SMARCE1
X
-
STAT3
X
X
STUB1
X
-
TNFSF10
X
-
TP53
X
X
WDR77
-
-
Association with Prostate cancer [50]
XPA
X
-
XRCC6
-
-
Association with Lung Cancer Chemotherapy [51]
The CCNs are extracted from SPNs using mutations from cancer patients, where the majority of
mutations are passengers (i.e. not related to cancer). The results showed no β2 impact upon removing
passenger mutations, only consolidated known drivers or genes associated with cancer caused impact in
higher-order structures.
5.2 Impacting genes and centrality measures
Taking into account traditional network science measures, drivers are known to have a high degree and
work as hubs [52], while some drivers genes have small degree [34]. Other works indicate that drivers can
9
be categorised using additional centrality measures [53, 54]. When characterising cancer driver genes,
one of the key challenges lies in identifying drivers in the long tail of distributions associated with
measures from protein networks and mutation data [5], as many methods are affected by “ascertainment
bias”, which tends to favour frequently mutated genes and network hubs [55]. Here, we discuss whether
genes impacting β2 structures can be characterized using four centrality measures.
Figure 3 displays the distributions of four centrality measures for all genes within each CCN. Grey
points represent genes whose removal does not impact β2, while red and blue points indicate genes
whose removal decreases β2, which correspond to the genes listed in Tables 1 and 2. Red points are
known drivers, and blue points are cancer-associated genes.
Fig. 3 Centrality distributions for CCNs. Grey points represent genes whose removal does not affect β2. Red and
blue points indicate genes whose removal reduces β2, with red points representing known drivers and blue points genes
associated with cancer.
Overall, each centrality measure exhibits a similar distribution across the three CCNs, but the
positions of the red and blue points vary. The CHR CCN has only five impacting genes, making it
difficult to identify clear patterns. In this network, drivers and cancer-associated genes intermingle,
occupying medium to high ranges in Degree, Closeness, and Betweenness. In the DNA CCN, with 13
impacting genes, the red and blue points are more evenly distributed in the middle, showing no clear
distinction between drivers and cancer-associated genes, and they do not appear at the distribution
extremes. Conversely, in the PCD CCN, drivers tend to occupy the top values in Degree, Closeness, and
Betweenness, with low Clustering values. Additionally, there is a noticeable separation where known
drivers tend to lead in these centrality measures, followed by cancer-associated genes.
10
Figure 3 shows that no single centrality measure is sufficient to characterise the genes impacting β2
structures. Although traditional centrality measures focus on nodes and edges within the network, they
fail to capture the complexity of high-dimensional structures associated with these genes. This indicates
that understanding the role of these genes requires going beyond basic centrality measures to account
for the more complex, high-dimensional interactions and structures present in the network.
6 Conclusion
The study presents a novel approach to identifying known drivers and cancer-associated genes within
cancer networks extracted from pathways using Persistent Homology. We constructed Cancer Consensus
Networks by integrating mutation data from six types of cancer and three main biological functions.
We measure the impact of removal of each gene in cancer networks with respect to its role in the
construction of higher-order structures. We complement the analysis using centrality measures to verify
if traditional measures can capture the impacting genes. The results demonstrate that only a few genes
decrease the number of voids (β2 structures). In particular, all impactful genes are established cancer
drivers or cancer-associated genes, supported by existing literature, with the potential to be new drivers.
Although not every driver or cancer-associated gene impacts β2, no passenger gene does. The pipeline
used in this work demonstrated high precision and low to average recall in distinguishing drivers from
passengers. Although centrality measures alone do not fully characterise drivers and cancer-associated
genes in CCNs, these genes generally exhibit low clustering and medium to high degree, closeness, and
betweenness centrality values. This centrality profile, combined with the observation that no passenger
mutations impact higher-order structures, can be utilized to evaluate candidate driver genes. Their
topological characteristics can help determine their biological function as drivers or passengers.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support received from the Federal Institute of Sao Paulo (IFSP),
the University of Sao Paulo (USP), the Sao Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP), the Center for
Mathematical Sciences Applied to Industry (CeMEAI), the Brazilian National Research and Technol-
ogy Council (CNPq), and the Brazilian Federal Foundation for Support and Evaluation of Graduate
Education (CAPES).
Declarations
Ethical Approval
The cancer data utilized in this study were sourced from TCGA. As TCGA de-identifies and anonymizes
all patient information, ethical approval was not required for this research.
11
Availability of data and materials
The mutation datasets are from a TCGA study [35] and can be download from cBioPortal.
All
code,
input,
and
output
files
are
on
GitHub:https://github.com/RodrigoHenriqueRamos/
Identifying-Key-Genes-in-Cancer-Networks-Using-Persistent-Homology
References
[1] Stratton, M.R., Campbell, P.J., Futreal, P.A.: The cancer genome. Nature 458(7239), 719–724
(2009)
[2] Ostroverkhova, D., Przytycka, T.M., Panchenko, A.R.: Cancer driver mutations: predictions and
reality. Trends in Molecular Medicine (2023)
[3] Garc´ıa-Campos, M.A., Espinal-Enr´ıquez, J., Hern´andez-Lemus, E.: Pathway analysis: state of the
art. Frontiers in physiology 6, 383 (2015)
[4] Dimitrakopoulos, C.M., Beerenwinkel, N.: Computational approaches for the identification of can-
cer genes and pathways. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Systems Biology and Medicine 9(1), 1364
(2017)
[5] Cutigi, J.F., Evangelista, A.F., Reis, R.M., Simao, A.: A computational approach for the discovery
of significant cancer genes by weighted mutation and asymmetric spreading strength in networks.
Scientific reports 11(1), 1–10 (2021)
[6] Cutigi, J.F., Evangelista, A.F., Simao, A.: Approaches for the identification of driver mutations in
cancer: A tutorial from a computational perspective. Journal of Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology 18(03), 2050016 (2020)
[7] Deng, Y., Luo, S., Deng, C., Luo, T., Yin, W., Zhang, H., Zhang, Y., Zhang, X., Lan, Y., Ping,
Y., et al.: Identifying mutual exclusivity across cancer genomes: computational approaches to dis-
cover genetic interaction and reveal tumor vulnerability. Briefings in Bioinformatics 20(1), 254–266
(2019)
[8] Masoomy, H., Askari, B., Tajik, S., Rizi, A.K., Jafari, G.R.: Topological analysis of interaction pat-
terns in cancer-specific gene regulatory network: persistent homology approach. Scientific Reports
11(1), 1–11 (2021)
[9] Benzekry, S., Tuszynski, J.A., Rietman, E.A., Lakka Klement, G.: Design principles for cancer
therapy guided by changes in complexity of protein-protein interaction networks. Biology direct
10, 1–14 (2015)
[10] Kumar, S., Warrell, J., Li, S., McGillivray, P.D., Meyerson, W., Salichos, L., Harmanci, A.,
Martinez-Fundichely, A., Chan, C.W., Nielsen, M.M., et al.: Passenger mutations in more than
12
2,500 cancer genomes: overall molecular functional impact and consequences. Cell 180(5), 915–927
(2020)
[11] Mayakonda, A., Koeffler, H.P.: Maftools: Efficient analysis, visualization and summarization of maf
files from large-scale cohort based cancer studies. BioRxiv, 052662 (2016)
[12] Dressler, L., Bortolomeazzi, M., Keddar, M.R., Misetic, H., Sartini, G., Acha-Sagredo, A., Montorsi,
L., Wijewardhane, N., Repana, D., Nulsen, J., et al.: Comparative assessment of genes driving
cancer and somatic evolution in non-cancer tissues: an update of the network of cancer genes (ncg)
resource. Genome biology 23(1), 1–22 (2022)
[13] Mart´ınez-Jim´enez, F., Mui˜nos, F., Sent´ıs, I., Deu-Pons, J., Reyes-Salazar, I., Arnedo-Pac, C., Mula-
roni, L., Pich, O., Bonet, J., Kranas, H., et al.: A compendium of mutational cancer driver genes.
Nature Reviews Cancer 20(10), 555–572 (2020)
[14] Ramos, R.H., Ferreira, C.d.O.L., Simao, A.: Human protein–protein interaction networks: A
topological comparison review. Heliyon (2024)
[15] Gillespie, M., Jassal, B., Stephan, R., Milacic, M., Rothfels, K., Senff-Ribeiro, A., Griss, J., Sevilla,
C., Matthews, L., Gong, C., et al.: The reactome pathway knowledgebase 2022. Nucleic acids
research 50(D1), 687–692 (2022)
[16] Wu, G., Haw, R.: Functional interaction network construction and analysis for disease discovery.
protein bioinformatics: from protein modifications and networks to proteomics, 235–253 (2017)
[17] Jassal, B., Matthews, L., Viteri, G., Gong, C., Lorente, P., Fabregat, A., Sidiropoulos, K., Cook,
J., Gillespie, M., Haw, R., et al.: The reactome pathway knowledgebase. Nucleic acids research
48(D1), 498–503 (2020)
[18] Carlsson, G.: Topology and data. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 46(2), 255–308
(2009)
[19] Chazal, F., Michel, B.: An introduction to topological data analysis: fundamental and practical
aspects for data scientists. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.04019 (2017)
[20] Chazal, F.: High-dimensional topological data analysis. In: Handbook of Discrete and Computa-
tional Geometry, pp. 663–683 (2017)
[21] Zomorodian, A., Carlsson, G.: Computing persistent homology. Discrete & Computational Geom-
etry 33(2), 249–274 (2005)
[22] Tadi´c, B., Andjelkovi´c, M., Boshkoska, B.M., Levnaji´c, Z.: Algebraic topology of multi-brain con-
nectivity networks reveals dissimilarity in functional patterns during spoken communications. PLoS
One 11(11), 0166787 (2016)
13
[23] Andjelkovi´c, M., Tadi´c, B., Melnik, R.: The topology of higher-order complexes associated with
brain hubs in human connectomes. Scientific reports 10(1), 17320 (2020)
[24] Kartun-Giles, A.P., Bianconi, G.: Beyond the clustering coefficient: A topological analysis of node
neighbourhoods in complex networks. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals: X 1, 100004 (2019)
[25] Horak, D., Maleti´c, S., Rajkovi´c, M.: Persistent homology of complex networks. Journal of
Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2009(03), 03034 (2009)
[26] Ichinomiya, T., Obayashi, I., Hiraoka, Y.: Persistent homology analysis of craze formation. Physical
Review E 95(1), 012504 (2017)
[27] Nguyen, M., Aktas, M., Akbas, E.: Bot detection on social networks using persistent homology.
Mathematical and Computational Applications 25(3), 58 (2020)
[28] Lawson, P., Sholl, A.B., Brown, J.Q., Fasy, B.T., Wenk, C.: Persistent homology for the quantitative
evaluation of architectural features in prostate cancer histology. Scientific reports 9(1), 1139 (2019)
[29] Qaiser, T., Sirinukunwattana, K., Nakane, K., Tsang, Y.-W., Epstein, D., Rajpoot, N.: Persistent
homology for fast tumor segmentation in whole slide histology images. Procedia Computer Science
90, 119–124 (2016)
[30] DeWoskin, D., Climent, J., Cruz-White, I., Vazquez, M., Park, C., Arsuaga, J.: Applications of
computational homology to the analysis of treatment response in breast cancer patients. Topology
and its Applications 157(1), 157–164 (2010)
[31] Schuster-B¨ockler, B., Lehner, B.: Chromatin organization is a major influence on regional mutation
rates in human cancer cells. nature 488(7412), 504–507 (2012)
[32] Jin, M.H., Oh, D.-Y.: Atm in dna repair in cancer. Pharmacology & therapeutics 203, 107391
(2019)
[33] Mishra, A.P., Salehi, B., Sharifi-Rad, M., Pezzani, R., Kobarfard, F., Sharifi-Rad, J., Nigam, M.:
Programmed cell death, from a cancer perspective: an overview. Molecular diagnosis & therapy
22(3), 281–295 (2018)
[34] Ramos, R.H., Cutigi, J.F., Oliveira Lage Ferreira, C.d., Simao, A.: Topological characterization
of cancer driver genes using reactome super pathways networks. In: Brazilian Symposium on
Bioinformatics, pp. 26–37 (2021). Springer
[35] Hoadley, K.A., Yau, C., Hinoue, T., Wolf, D.M., Lazar, A.J., Drill, E., Shen, R., Taylor, A.M.,
Cherniack, A.D., Thorsson, V., et al.: Cell-of-origin patterns dominate the molecular classification
of 10,000 tumors from 33 types of cancer. Cell 173(2), 291–304 (2018)
14
[36] Guimaraes, D., Hainaut, P.: Tp53: a key gene in human cancer. Biochimie 84(1), 83–93 (2002)
[37] Shrestha, S., Adhikary, G., Xu, W., Kandasamy, S., Eckert, R.L.: Actl6a suppresses p21cip1 expres-
sion to enhance the epidermal squamous cell carcinoma phenotype. Oncogene 39(36), 5855–5866
(2020)
[38] Carotenuto, P., Romano, A., Barbato, A., Quadrano, P., Brillante, S., Volpe, M., Ferrante, L.,
Tammaro, R., Morleo, M., De Cegli, R., et al.: Targeting the mitf/apaf-1 axis as salvage therapy
for mapk inhibitors in resistant melanoma. Cell Reports 41(6) (2022)
[39] Boac, B.M., Abbasi, F., Ismail-Khan, R., Xiong, Y., Siddique, A., Park, H., Han, M., Saeed-Vafa,
D., Soliman, H., Henry, B., et al.: Expression of the bad pathway is a marker of triple-negative
status and poor outcome. Scientific Reports 9(1), 17496 (2019)
[40] Roohollahi, K., Jong, Y., Pai, G., Zaini, M.A., Lint, K., Sie, D., Rooimans, M.A., Rockx, D.,
Hoskins, E.E., Ameziane, N., et al.: Birc2–birc3 amplification: a potentially druggable feature of a
subset of head and neck cancers in patients with fanconi anemia. Scientific reports 12(1), 45 (2022)
[41] Zhang, H.-M., Qiao, Q.-D., Xie, H.-F., Wei, J.-X.: Breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (brms1)
suppresses prostate cancer progression by inducing apoptosis and regulating invasion. European
Review for Medical & Pharmacological Sciences 21(1) (2017)
[42] Liu, J., Zhao, M., Feng, X., Zeng, Y., Lin, D.: Expression and prognosis analyses of casp1 in acute
myeloid leukemia. Aging (Albany NY) 13(10), 14088 (2021)
[43] Zhu, J., Shi, Y., Lan, S., Wang, J., Jiang, F., Tang, C., Cai, Y., Pan, Z., Jian, H., Fang, H., et al.:
Dissection of pyroptosis-related prognostic signature and casp6-mediated regulation in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma: New sights to clinical decision-making. Apoptosis 28(5), 769–782 (2023)
[44] Yuan, Y., Cao, W., Zhou, H., Qian, H., Wang, H.: H2a. z acetylation by lincznf337-as1 via
kat5 implicated in the transcriptional misregulation in cancer signaling pathway in hepatocellular
carcinoma. Cell Death & Disease 12(6), 609 (2021)
[45] Callari, M., Sola, M., Magrin, C., Rinaldi, A., Bolis, M., Paganetti, P., Colnaghi, L., Papin, S.:
Cancer-specific association between tau (mapt) and cellular pathways, clinical outcome, and drug
response. Scientific Data 10(1), 637 (2023)
[46] Peterson, L.E., Kovyrshina, T.: Dna repair gene expression adjusted by the pcna metagene predicts
survival in multiple cancers. Cancers 11(4), 501 (2019)
[47] Xiao, R.-W., Wang, F., Wang, T.-M., Zhang, J.-B., Wu, Z.-Y., Deng, C.-M., Liao, Y., Zhou, T.,
Yang, D.-W., Dong, S.-Q., et al.: Rare poln mutations confer risk for familial nasopharyngeal
carcinoma through weakened epstein-barr virus lytic replication. EBioMedicine 84, 104267 (2022)
15
[48] Wang, Z., Jia, R., Wang, L., Yang, Q., Hu, X., Fu, Q., Zhang, X., Li, W., Ren, Y.: The emerging
roles of rad51 in cancer and its potential as a therapeutic target. Frontiers in Oncology 12, 935593
(2022)
[49] Whatcott, C.J., Ng, S., Barrett, M.T., Hostetter, G., Von Hoff, D.D., Han, H.: Inhibition of rock1
kinase modulates both tumor cells and stromal fibroblasts in pancreatic cancer. PloS one 12(8),
0183871 (2017)
[50] O’Bryant, D., Wang, Z.: The essential role of wd repeat domain 77 in prostate tumor initiation
induced by pten loss. Oncogene 37(30), 4151–4163 (2018)
[51] Singh, A., Singh, N., Behera, D., Sharma, S.: Role of polymorphic xrcc6 (ku70)/xrcc7 (dna-pkcs)
genes towards susceptibility and prognosis of lung cancer patients undergoing platinum based
doublet chemotherapy. Molecular biology reports 45, 253–261 (2018)
[52] Porta-Pardo, E., Garcia-Alonso, L., Hrabe, T., Dopazo, J., Godzik, A.: A pan-cancer catalogue of
cancer driver protein interaction interfaces. PLoS computational biology 11(10), 1004518 (2015)
[53] Erten, C., Houdjedj, A., Kazan, H.: Ranking cancer drivers via betweenness-based outlier detection
and random walks. BMC bioinformatics 22, 1–16 (2021)
[54] Li, F., Li, H., Shang, J., Liu, J.-X., Dai, L., Liu, X., Li, Y.: A network-based method for identifying
cancer driver genes based on node control centrality. Experimental Biology and Medicine 248(3),
232–241 (2023)
[55] Reyna, M.A., Leiserson, M.D., Raphael, B.J.: Hierarchical hotnet: identifying hierarchies of altered
subnetworks. Bioinformatics 34(17), 972–980 (2018)
16
Appendix
Simplicial Complex and Filtration
A simplicial complex is a collection of simplices σ = [0, ..., k] with dimension k. A 0-simplex corresponds
to a vertex [0], a 1-simplex to an edge [0, 1], a 2-simplex to a triangle [0, 1, 2], a 3-simplex to a tetrahedron
[0, 1, 2, 3], and so forth. Figure 4-(A) provides a visual representation of simplices. In a simplicial complex
K, if a simplex σ ⊂K, then every non-empty subset τ ⊂σ is also a part of K. Additionally, two
k-simplices in K are either disjoint or intersect in a lower-dimensional simplex that is also contained
within K.
To analyze the persistent homology of a dataset, a sequence of simplicial complexes K1 ⊆K2 ⊆... ⊆
Kn, known as a filtration, must be constructed. A common filtration is the Vietoris-Rips complex [19],
which constructs a topological space from a metric space using a distance r. By selecting a parameter
r > 0, we construct a simplicial complex Kr, where a k-simplex is included in Kr if the distance
between any two points forming the simplex is less than 2r. It is important to note that if r2 ≥r1, then
Kr1 ⊆Kr2. Figure 4-(B) exemplify a filtration over 4 points, and the birth and death of topological
structures.
Fig. 4 (A) Shows examples of simplexes of dimensions 0, 1, 2 and 3. (B) Presents the Vietoris-Rips filtration for a
point cloud consisting of four equidistant points and the Persistent Barcode capturing the birth and death of topological
structures.
Chains and Boundaries
To describe the topological properties in a simplicial complex Kr, we must utilize concepts from algebraic
topology. In a simplicial complex K, for k ≥0, a k-chain Ck is defined as a vector space whose basis
consists of a set of k-simplices in K. The dimension of Ck is determined by the number of elements in
this basis. These vector spaces are composed of all linear combinations c = P
i aiσi, where ai ∈Zp (p
being a prime integer) and the summation runs over all k-simplices σi in K. Within this framework,
the linear transformation ∂k : Ck →Ck −1 can be introduced. This map, known as the boundary map,
is defined as ∂k([0, ..., k]) = Pk
i=0(−1)i[0, ...,ˆi, ..., k], where the notation ˆi indicates the removal of that
17
vertex. The boundary map applied to a simplex yields the alternating sum of the simplices along the
boundary. Recall that the boundary of a k-simplex σ is the union of the (k - 1)-subsimplices τ ⊆σ.
Additionally, note that the composition ∂k o ∂k+1 = 0. This implies that im(∂k+1) ⊆ker(∂k).
Consider a chain complex ... →Ck+1
∂k+1
−−−→Ck
∂k
−→Ck−1 →... →C2
∂2
−→C1
∂1
−→C0
∂0
−→0, and define
two subspaces of Ck using the kernel and image of the boundary maps, namely Zk = ker(∂k) (k-cycles)
and Bk = im(∂k+1) (k-boundaries). It is important to note that Bk is a subspace of Zk, and thus we can
define Hk = Zk/Bk, which represents the quotient of these vector spaces. The kth Betti number [19],
denoted by βk, is defined as βk = dim(Hk) = dim(Zk) −dim(Bk). Betti numbers quantify the number
of “holes” in a simplicial complex K. Specifically, β0 indicates the number of connected components
in K, β1 the number of cycles in K, β2 the number of 2-dimensional holes, and more generally, βk
represents the number of k-dimensional holes in K. Betti numbers are a topological invariant, meaning
that topologically equivalent spaces share the same Betti numbers. Figure 5 provides an example of
calculating the Betti number β1 for two distinct simplicial complexes.
Fig. 5 The Betti number β1 for the complexes K0 and K1. Observe that the only element in C1 that lies within the
kernel of ∂1 is [0, 1] + [1, 2] + [2, 0], leading to dim(Z1(K0)) = dim(Z1(K1)) = 1. Additionally, note that the boundary
of the simplex [0, 1, 2] forms the oriented triangle [1, 2] −[0, 2] + [0, 1]. As a result, dim(B1(K0)) = 0, dim(B1(K1)) = 1,
yielding b1(K0) = 1 and b1(K1) = 0. This indicates that K0 contains a cycle, whereas K1 does not.
18
