 
1 
First image-guided treatment of a mouse tumor with radioactive ion beams 
 
Daria Boscolo1,§, Giulio Lovatti2,§, Olga Sokol1,§, Tamara Vitacchio1, Francesco Evangelista2, 
Emma Haettner1, Walter Tinganelli1, Christian Graeff1,3, Uli Weber1,4, Christoph Schuy1, 
Munetaka Nitta2, Martina Moglioni1, Daria Kostyleva1, Sivaji Purushothaman1, Peter G. 
Thirolf2, Jonathan Bortfeldt2, Christoph Scheidenberger1,5,6, Katia Parodi2,# and Marco 
Durante1,7,8,#,* 
 
1. GSI Helmholtzzentrum für Schwerionenforschung, Darmstadt, Germany 
2. Department of Medical Physics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München (LMU), 
Munich, Germany. 
3. Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology (ETIT), Technische 
Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany 
4. Life Science Engineering Faculty, Technische Hochschule Mittelhessen, Gießen, 
Germany 
5. Institute of Physics, Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen, Gießen, Germany 
6. Helmholtz Research Academy Hesse for FAIR (HFHF), GSI Helmholtz Center for 
Heavy Ion Research, Campus Giessen, 35392 Giessen, Germany 
7. Institute of Condensed Matter Physics, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt, 
Germany 
8. Department of Physics „Ettore Pancini“, University Federico II, Naples, Italy 
 
§:  these authors contributed equally 
#: these authors contributed equally 
*Corresponding author: m.durante@gsi.de  
 
 
 
2 
Abstract 
Radioactive ion beams (RIB) are a key focus of current research in nuclear physics. Already 
long ago it was proposed that they could have applications in cancer therapy.  In fact, while 
charged particle therapy is potentially the most effective radiotherapy technique available, it is 
highly susceptible to uncertainties in the beam range. RIB are well-suited for image-guided 
particle therapy, as isotopes that undergo β+-decay can be precisely visualized using positron 
emission tomography (PET), enabling accurate real-time monitoring of the beam range. We 
successfully treated a mouse osteosarcoma using a radioactive 11C-ion beam. The tumor was 
located in the neck, in close proximity to the spinal cord, increasing the risk of radiation-
induced myelopathy from even slight variations in the beam range caused by anatomical 
changes or incorrect calibration of the planning CT. We managed to completely control the 
tumor with the highest dose while minimizing toxicity. Low-grade neurological side effects 
were correlated to the positron activity measured in the spine. The biological washout of the 
activity from the tumor volume was dependent on the dose, indicating a potential component 
of vascular damage at high doses. This experiment marks the first instance of tumor treatment 
using RIB and paves the way for future clinical applications. 
 
 
 
3 
Main  
Nuclear physics methods have been instrumental in improving cancer radiotherapy 
using accelerated charged particles (protons or heavier ions). Charged nuclei have indeed a 
favorable depth-dose distribution in the human body thanks to the Bragg peak1. Therapy with 
accelerated 12C-ions is currently ongoing in fourteen centers worldwide2 and, even if more 
expensive than proton therapy, adds biological advantages to the physical benefit of the Bragg 
peak3. Particle therapy is, however, much more sensitive to uncertainties in the beam range 
than conventional X-rays, exactly because of the high dose deposited in the Bragg peak4. 
Several techniques are available to monitor the beam range exploiting the nuclear interactions 
of the ions in the tissue5, including PET6. PET in carbon ion therapy exploits +-emitting 
isotopes 11C and 10C produced by the nuclear fragmentation of the therapeutic stable 12C beam 
in the patient’s body. The method was extensively tested during the carbon ion therapy pilot 
trial at GSI in Darmstadt7, then at HIT in Heidelberg8 and more recently at CNAO in Pavia9. 
However, the counting rate from projectile fragments is low, the activity peak is largely shifted 
with respect to the Bragg peak because the particle range of the isotopic fragments of 12C 
depends on their mass, and the image analysis has been mainly performed off-line. Therefore, 
PET in 12C-ion therapy remains marginal and is not really able to reduce the range uncertainty 
as desired.  
Most of these problems can be overcome using RIB rather than stable beams for 
therapy. RIB are generally acknowledged as the main tool to address the most important 
modern questions in nuclear physics, as they allow the study of nuclei at extreme conditions10–
12. In cancer radiotherapy, RIB have the same biological effectiveness of the corresponding 
stable ions beams13,14 but can increase the PET signal/noise ratio by approximately an order of 
magnitude, reduce the shift between the activity and dose peaks, and mitigate the washout 
image blur with short-lived isotopes (e.g.10C) and in-beam acquisition15,16. The reduced 
uncertainty in range allows a shrinkage of the tumor margins around the clinical target volume 
(CTV), and this can lower toxicity for both serial or parallel organs-at-risk (OAR)17. Attempts 
to use  RIB in cancer therapy started already in the 80s during the heavy ion therapy pilot 
project at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (CA, USA)18, but they were always hampered by 
the low intensities of the secondary beams produced by fragmentation of the primary ions used 
for therapy (for an historical review see ref.19). Research at modern high-intensity accelerators 
that can produce RIB with intensity sufficient for therapeutic treatments20 would pave the way 
to PET-guided heavy ion treatments. One of these facilities is GSI/FAIR in Darmstadt 
(Germany)21, where we started the BARB (Biomedical Applications of Radioactive Ion Beams) 
project whose goal was to perform the first in vivo tumor treatment with RIB15.  
Within BARB, we have already reported the RIB imaging resolution in phantoms22,23 
and transported the beam from the fragment separator (FRS) to the medical vault (Cave M, 
where animal experiments are possible) at the GSI accelerator facility24 (Extended Data Fig. 
1).  In Cave M we have then enabled the reproducible installation of the portable small-animal 
SIRMIO in-beam PET scanner25, built by the Ludwig-Maximillian-University (LMU) group 
in Munich for in vivo range verification in pre-clinical particle therapy experiments. The 
SIRMIO PET scanner is based on 56 scintillator blocks of pixelated LYSO crystals. The 
 
4 
crystals are arranged providing a pyramidal-step shape to optimize the geometrical coverage 
in a spherical configuration26. Inside the detector it is possible to accommodate an anesthetized 
mouse in vertical position using a custom 3D-printed holder for simultaneous irradiation and 
real-time PET imaging, also developed at LMU. The mouse model used in this study is a 
syngeneic LM8 osteosarcoma implanted in the C3H mouse neck27. Osteosarcoma is a very 
radioresistant tumor28 and for this reason it is a typical candidate for treatment with accelerated 
12C-ions29. Fig. 1A shows CT images of the tumor growth and the actual visible tumor in the 
neck. In Fig. 1B we show the contouring of the individual gross tumor volumes (GTV) of the 
different mice used in the experiments. By summing up all the tumor profiles and smoothing 
the resulting outline, we have contoured a universal CTV applied to all mice in this study.  The 
proximity of the CTV to the spinal cord makes high precision and online guidance necessary 
to avoid radiation myelopathy30. Measured endpoints were tumor growth, spinal cord toxicity, 
and washout rate of the radioactive signal from the tumor. We elected to use 11C projectile even 
if our previous experiments22,23 show that the highest range resolving power can be achieved 
with short-lived isotopes such as 10C or 15O. We preferred to use carbon, which is already used 
in many clinical facilities, rather than oxygen, and the intensity of N-2 isotopes such as 10C is 
too low for very high-dose single-fraction treatment.  The goal of the experiment was to 
demonstrate for the first time the ability to use a 11C-ion radioactive beam to achieve full tumor 
control of a radioresistant tumor, such as osteosarcoma, proximal to an OAR, while maintaining 
low toxicity thanks to real-time PET image guidance. 
The BARB beamline 
Fig. 2 shows the full BARB beamline prepared in Cave M at GSI and photographs of 
different components. The secondary beam of 11C comes from the FRS31 (Extended Data Fig. 
1). The primary intensity of the 12C-ion beam in the SIS18 at 300 MeV/u was 1.61010 
particles/spill and the intensity of 11C-ions in Cave M entrance was 2.5106 particles/spill. To 
allow a longer online PET acquisition time, we used a short spill duration of 200 ms and a 
relatively low duty cycle with a repetition rate of 3 s (see Extended Data Table 1 for a summary 
of all the parameters).  
Measured pristine 11C-ion Bragg curve is shown in Extended Data Fig. 2. To cover the 
full CTV, the pristine Bragg peak has to be extended to produce a Spread-Out-Bragg-Peak 
(SOBP). The measured SOBP is shown in Extended Data Fig. 3. The SOBP was formed by a 
3D-printed range modulator (Extended Data Fig. 4A) from a 2D scan of the monoenergetic 
pencil beam. 
The distal field contour was modulated to the tumour CTV (Fig. 1B) by a 3D-printed 
plastic compensator collar (Extended Data Fig. 4B). We measured a dose-rate around 1 Gy/min 
in the tumor that was covered by the SOBP at the same dose. A total of 32 mice were irradiated 
with either 20 or 5 Gy. 
Activity maps 
In BARB we use real-time PET imaging to monitor the RIB dose delivery. A FLUKA32 
Monte Carlo simulation of the beam reaching the tumor inside the SIRMIO PET scanner is 
 
5 
shown in Fig. 3 A-B along with the activity distribution image measured online (Fig. 3C) with 
11C-ions by the PET scanner and overlayed on the CT scan of the animal under irradiation. 
Measured activity and calculated positron annihilation profiles, integrated along the x-axis and 
displayed along the beam direction (z-axis), are shown in Fig. 3D along with the 1D dose 
profile in the z-direction. Even if the dose and the activity are deposited by the same ion in this 
experiment, the 11C beam momentum spread shifts the activity beyond the dose fall-off. A shift 
of approximately  2 mm is observed between the measured activity and simulated positron 
annihilation map peaks, with measured values closer to the actual dose fall-off. The depth at 
80% dose fall-off  matches the simulated activity peak. Supplementary video 1 shows the build-
up of the measured PET signal vs. irradiation time in sagittal and transversal views. Individual 
images of all mice are shown in Supplementary Fig. 1. The tumour is very close to the spinal 
cord, and in-beam PET image was used to check that the SOPB was not covering the spine. 
For all animals (Supplementary Fig. 1) the peak activity was not inside or beyond the spinal 
cord, so no range correction by adjusting the degrader thickness (Fig. 2) had to be applied.  
Tumor control 
Tumor sizes of irradiated and control tumor-bearing animals were measured for four 
weeks after the day of irradiation using caliper or CT. Results shown in Fig. 4 demonstrate 
complete tumor control after 20 Gy and prolonged tumor growth delay after 5 Gy, with 
evidence of recurrence after 2 weeks. Full tumor control was also achieved with 20 Gy X-rays 
(Extended Data Fig. 5). The data are compatible with a complete coverage of the tumor target 
for all animals. Recurrence at the lower dose is expected considering the high radioresistance 
of the osteosarcoma.  
Toxicity 
Skin toxicity scoring in the tumor-bearing controls was complicated by the growth of 
the tumor that caused superficial lesions. In irradiated animals, all of them bearing small tumors 
post-irradiation, skin toxicity was radiation-induced as shown in Extended Data Fig. 6. No 
animals showed skin toxicity grade > 3.  
Being the tumor very close to the cervical area of the spinal cord, main expected toxicity 
was radiation-induced myelopathy. However, none of the animals exposed to 11C-ions 
presented severe morbidity such as forelimb paralysis or pronounced kyphosis. Extended Data 
Fig. 5 and Supplementary video 2 show the toxicity after X-rays, which is much more severe 
than for 11C-ions. Animals suffered severe weight loss due to impaired feeding, ostensibly 
caused by damage to the esophagus, and grade 3 kyphosis, caused by cervical myelopathy as 
expected from previous experiments30. This toxicity is related to the X-ray dose that, 
unavoidably, was received by the organs behind the tumor in the neck region. 
For animals exposed to 11C-ions, the lack of severe toxicity demonstrate that online 
PET measurement (Fig. 3) correctly predicted the position of the SOBP. However, since the 
tumor is close to the spine, some activity was inevitably observed in the spinal cord, 
corresponding to the dose fall-off (Fig. 3). We checked the impact of this residual dose on low-
grade toxicity by measuring grip strength performance, a common test to assess cervical spinal 
 
6 
injury33 (Extended Data Fig. 7). All results of the bi-weekly grip strength performance for 
individual mice are reported in Supplementary Fig. 2. A wide inter-individual variability is 
noted in those curves. However, by pooling the data in Fig. 5A-B we show that the strength of 
the mice is reduced after irradiation compared to controls, indicative of a minor deficit in 
neuromuscular function.  Correlation of integral PET counts in the spine with individual grip 
performance is shown in Fig. 5C-D. Despite the wide scatter in the grip test data, there is a 
significant correlation between activity in the spine and decreased mouse forelimb strength. 
We therefore clearly demonstrated that the beam online visualization allowed sparing of the 
OAR and strongly reduced toxicity compared to X-rays. 
Washout 
The activity in a plastic target decreases after irradiation because of the physical decay 
of the 11C (T1/2=20.34 min) projectile and nuclear fragments (10C, T1/2=19.3 s; 15O, T1/2=2.04 
min). We have previously modelled the radioactive decay with exponential functions that 
include all fragments produced23. In this experiment, the radioactive decay is overlapped with 
an unknown biological decay due to the blood flow in the tumor that removes the radioactive 
isotopes from the site of decay. The degree of vascularization in our tumor model was estimated 
by perfusion to opacify microvasculature structure in CT. Supplementary video 3 shows that 
our osteosarcoma in the neck is highly vascularized, so a strong biological washout is expected. 
The total washout data for all animals are reported in Supplementary Fig.  3. Studies in Japan 
in a rat glioma model point to a double-exponential model for the biological washout34, which 
was also applicable to our data based on the results of the Fisher’s test on fitting parameters. 
We therefore used the following equation to fit the activity data measured after the irradiation 
was stopped: 
𝐴(𝑡) = 𝐴𝑝ℎ𝑦𝑠∙𝐴𝑏𝑖𝑜= 𝐴0 ∑𝑤𝑖𝑒
−𝑙𝑛2
𝑇1/2𝑖𝑡
𝑖
∙[𝑊𝑠𝑒−𝑘𝑠𝑡+ (1 −𝑊𝑠)𝑒−𝑘𝑓𝑡] 
where A0 is the activity at the end of the irradiation, Ws - the relative weight of the slow 
component, and ks and kf are the slow and fast time constants, respectively. T1/2i is the half-life 
of the i-th contributing radioisotope and wi is its fraction in the total number of fragments. 
Based on the FLUKA simulation, we have considered 96% 11C, 3% 10C, and 0.5% 15O ions. 
Fig. 6 shows the pooled analysis of the animals exposed to 5 or 20 Gy (individual curves are 
reported in Supplementary Fig. 3). The results clearly show a significant difference between 
the low- and high-dose experiments. The fast component, very well visible at 5 Gy, essentially 
disappears at 20 Gy. This suggests a quick vascular injury at high doses that delays the washout 
process in the first half an hour after the irradiation. 
Discussion  
The goal of the BARB project was to provide a first demonstration of tumor treatment 
with RIB with real-time range verification by PET. The results in Fig. 4 are in fact the first 
example of successful tumor control with RIB. We used a very high dose of 20 Gy in a single 
fraction, expecting tumor control based on our own previous X-ray experiment in the same 
murine osteosarcoma model. However, while X-rays caused severe toxicity at that dose 
 
7 
(Extended data Fig. 5, Supplementary video 2), this was not the case with 11C-ions, where we 
observed minor toxicity only, correlated to the residual activity measured in the spine (Fig. 5). 
Therefore, we conclude that image-guided particle therapy with RIB is feasible, safe and 
effective.  
The results on washout (Fig. 6) are intriguing and deserve further experiments. One of 
the main tenets of radiotherapy is that tumor control can only be achieved when all cancer stem 
cells are killed35. However, already 20 years ago, it has been shown that at high doses 
microvascular endothelial apoptosis can contribute to tumor sterilization36. Later studies 
showed that the tumor damage at high doses induce vascular damage37 and can be mediated by 
an ischemic-reperfusion mechanism38. This idea has been already translated in clinics with the 
single-dose radiotherapy (SDRT)39, that uses single fractions of 24 Gy rather than fractionation 
in small malignancies, achieving excellent clinical results40. However, the concept is 
controversial. In fact, according to the classical linear-quadratic model, single fractions are 
much more effective than fractionated doses, and therefore the benefits of SDRT may simply 
be attributed to the high biological effectiveness of single doses41,42. The available experimental 
data are not conclusive43. Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI in rats shows increased 
permeability after high doses of X-rays or C-ions44, but those studies look at the effects weeks 
after irradiation, whereas our results cover the initial 30 minutes after exposure. This time frame 
is crucial, as other studies reported ischemic stress following SDRT within a few minutes38 or 
hours45. Biological washout provides a direct measurement of the vascular perfusion in tumor, 
and therefore we believe that this technique can clarify the vascular engagement after 
radiotherapy. Our results are consistent with an ischemic stress occurring very early after high 
doses. Although reperfusion was not observed within the measured time interval, we cannot 
rule out the possibility that it may occur at a later time. 
Outlook 
What are the next preclinical steps in RIB research? We will test short-lived isotopes 
such as 10C or 15O, which are expected to provide a higher PET imaging resolution. For 10C, it 
will be necessary to use the new Super-FRS46 at FAIR, which will be able to provide much 
higher intensities of secondary beams.  
One issue to be solved is the shift between physical dose and activity that is significant 
even with RIB because of the momentum spread (Fig. 3D). The dependence of the shift from 
the momentum acceptance had been previously observed in PMMA phantoms47 and our 
simulations confirm previous calculations suggesting that the simulated activity peak predicts 
the position of the 80% Bragg peak fall-off48. However, our measured activity is also shifted 
compared to simulations (Fig. 3D). The rationale of real-time image-guidance is indeed that 
there are unavoidable uncertainties in the actual mouse position, anatomy and composition 
deduced from a pre-treatment CT, and these uncertainties are not predicted by the Monte 
Carlo simulation but are visible in the measurement. For instance CT was acquired with mice 
in horizontal position in the SIRMIO PET holder, while irradiation was always performed with 
mice in vertical position (Fig. 2). In addition, the discrepancies may arise from the omission of 
specific detector details in the simulation, which only approximates the activity with the 
 
8 
positron annihilation distribution and a 1-mm Gaussian filter. A machine learning algorithm is 
in preparation to allow online transformation of the image and the profile from activity to dose, 
so that an online dose-map can be displayed.  
For the washout studies, future experiments should investigate a wider range of doses 
and extended post irradiation time-points, alongside tumor histology to better assess vascular 
changes following irradiation. 
Can these successful results lead to a clinical translation of RIB? The MEDICIS-
Promed49,50 project at CERN proposed an ISOL production of a 11C beam that can then be 
injected directly into medical synchrotrons currently used for 12C-ion therapy. Moving the 
isotope production to the low-energy injecting area can indeed be an excellent cost-saving 
solution where RIB can be used at least for an initial test of the range before a full treatment 
course. The Open-PET scanner51 developed at QST in Japan or the INSIDE in-beam PET9,52 
installed at CNAO can be excellent detectors for clinical applications of RIB. Finally, washout 
can also have an important prognostic value in the clinics as it should be correlated to the tumor 
vasculature state and eventually to the level of hypoxia, a notorious negative prognostic factor 
in therapy34,53. Our preclinical results show for the first time the feasibility of RIB radiotherapy 
and support these ongoing efforts for clinical translation. 
 
9 
Methods  
 
RIB production  
The 11C beam was produced via in-flight separation. A 300 MeV/n 12C primary beam from the 
SIS18 synchrotron impinges on a 8.045 g/cm2 thick beryllium target at the FRS31 and 
undergoes peripheral nuclear reactions, so that one or more nucleons are stripped-off, leading 
to a variety of lighter isotopes from carbon and other elements from boron down to hydrogen. 
Via a combined magnetic rigidity analysis and energy loss, which is induced in a so-called 
wedge-shaped degrader that is located at the central focal plane of the fragment separator, an 
isotopic clean 11C beam is achieved. This beam was used at the FRS for a variety of basic 
nuclear and atomic physics studies (such as reaction cross sections of the 11C ions, their range 
and range straggling, basic PET studies etc.)22,23,54 in preparation of the present experiment. Via 
the connecting beamline to the target hall24, the isotopic clean beam is transported to the Cave 
M, where the present irradiation has been accomplished. The FRS and its three branches are 
shown in Extended Data Fig. 1 and exact parameters of the beam used in the present 
experiments are reported in Extended Data Table 1. 
Dosimetry  
The 11C beam from the FRS reached the experimental room with an intensity of 2.5106 
particles per spill. To minimize irradiation and allow for extended PET image acquisition, a 
beam cycle of 0.2 s ON and 3 s OFF was used. Once in the experimental room the beam was 
monitored with large parallel plate ionization chambers55. The beam was characterized in terms 
of beam spot size and 1D and 3D depth dose distributions in water by means of a PTW 
Peakfinder and a water phantom equipped with an OCTAVIUS 1600 (PTW)56.The latter setup 
allows to acquire 2D dose distributions at different water depth which can be processed to 
generate 3D dose maps distributions.  
A range modulator was used to generate a 1.2 cm Spread-Out Bragg Peak (SOBP) in water. 
This modulator was 3D-printed on a 3D Systems ProJet MJP 2500 Plus using VisiJet M2S-
HT250 as the printing material and VisiJet M2 SUP as the support material. The printing 
material has a water-equivalent density of 1.162 g/cm³ and a physical density of 1.1819 g/cm³. 
The measured pristine and SOBP curves are shown in Extended Data Figs. 2 and 3, respectively. 
The Bragg peak position in water for the pristine depth dose distribution was measured at 80.5 
mm. By comparison with Monte Carlo simulation it was then possible to estimate beam 
parameters such as the beam energy and momentum spread. All measured and estimated beam 
parameters, also used for the Monte Carlo simulations, are reported in the Extended Data  Table 
1.  
A system of modulator, degraders, collimator and compensator was then used to passively 
modulate and optimize the beam for the animal irradiation. A schematic of the complete setup 
for mice irradiation is shown in Fig. 2A. The SIRMIO PET scanner was mounted on the 
beamline with the isocenter aligned to the tumor's center. The initial beam energy is high to 
increase the efficiency of the FRS but has to be reduced for a small-animal experiment. The 
 
10 
beam was indeed attenuated using a 28.37 mm thick aluminum degrader. Fine adjustments to 
the Bragg peak position were made using a range shifter equipped with polyethylene plates.  
Two large brass shielding elements were also included in the beam line to protect the SIRMIO 
detector from stray radiation damage. A brass collimator with a 15×12 mm elliptical aperture 
was used to shape the beam laterally. It was positioned as close as possible to the SIRMIO 
detector aperture to minimize lateral scattering effects. Finally, the distal part of the SOBP was 
shaped to the tumor CTV using a specially designed compensator, which was placed around 
the neck of the mice and secured on the mice bed. These compensators, produced using the 
same technology as the range modulator, also served for immobilization and mice positioning. 
Dosimetry at the target position was conducted using a small volume pinpoint ionization 
chamber (PTW TM31023) placed inside a custom-designed holder, ensuring the sensitive 
volume of the detector matched the tumor depth. 
Animal model  
All experiments were performed using 11-12-week-old female C3H/He mice (Janvier Labs, 
France) according to German Federal Law under the approval of the Hessen Animal Ethics 
Committee (Project License DA17/2003). Mice were divided into five groups: 20 Gy 11C 
irradiation (17 animals, followed up for 6 months after the irradiation); 20 Gy and 5 Gy 11C 
irradiation followed by additional 30 minutes of PET signal acquisition (8 and 7 animals, 
respectively, followed up for four weeks after the irradiation); tumor-bearing sham-irradiated 
controls (11 animals, followed up for four weeks after the irradiation day); and tumor-free 
controls (8 animals, followed up for 6 months after the irradiation day).  Mice were housed at 
GSI in a conventional animal facility (non-SPF) at 22°C, 12-hour light-dark cycle, with 
unrestricted access to water and a standard diet (Ssniff, Germany). Fourteen days before 
irradiation, 106 mouse Dunn osteosarcoma LM8 cells (originating from C3H/He mice, 
purchased from Riken BioResource Center, Japan) were injected in 20 µl of PBS buffer 
solution subcutaneously in the neck area of the mouse, above the cervical area of the spine. To 
maintain the consistency of injections, during the procedure animals were anaesthetized with 
2% isoflurane, which was inhaled via a face mask. After two weeks, most tumors were palpable 
and measurable at least with the μCT.  
μCT  
To collect the data on the tumor growth, we performed μCT measurements with VivaCT 80 
scanner (SCANCO Medical AG, Switzerland). To ensure the reproducible positioning of the 
mice as during the 11C irradiation, we have used the custom-made bed imitating the geometry 
of the SIRMIO bed. Additionally, animals were immobilized using the compensator collar, so 
that the scans can be utilized for the later Monte Carlo calculations. During the scan, animals 
were anesthetized with isoflurane (3% for the induction, 1.5-2% for maintenance during the 
scan). Neck regions of 31 mm were scanned for approximately 5 minutes at tube voltage and 
current of 45 kVp and 177 μA, respectively, adding a 0.1 mm aluminum filter, acquiring 250 
projections per 180° with 45 ms integration time. The resulting images had a voxel size of 97.1 
μm. After the scan, animals were allowed to recover before being transferred to the original 
cage. The scans performed at 14 days after the tumor cells injection into the animals used to 
establish the tumor model were used to contour the generalized CTV for the treatment planning. 
 
11 
The contouring of the visible tumor mass was done manually with the 3D Slicer software57 for 
every animal, then the individual GTV contours were added up and the final CTV segmentation 
was smoothened up and made symmetrical. The animals selected for 11C irradiation were 
scanned one day before the irradiation (13 days after the tumor induction) and then scanned 
weekly during a month after the irradiation; the animals remaining after the 28-days timepoint 
were scanned monthly afterwards until the sacrifice timepoint. 
Tumour vascularization 
To assess the tumor vascularization, animals were sacrificed and perfused ex vivo with 
VascupaintTM contrast agent (yellow colloidal bismuth suspension, MediLumine, Canada). 
After allowing the compound to polymerize for 24 hours, tumors were extracted and scanned 
at a high resolution (10 micron) with the following scanner settings: tube voltage and current 
of 55 kVp and 145 μA, respectively, 0.5 mm aluminum filter, 1500 projections per 180° with 
600 ms integration time. The 3D reconstruction of the tumor vasculature was done using the 
scanner’s built-in software ‘Bone morphology’ function following the approach of another 
study with a contrast agent58.  
X-ray experiment 
The primary goal of the X-ray experiment was to assess tumour control and the toxicity of high 
doses of radiation to mouse skin and to the spinal cord. We used the in-house X-ray generator 
(Isovolt DS1, Seifert, Ahrensberg, Germany) operated at 250 kVp and 16 mA, with 7 mm 
beryllium, 1 mm aluminum, and 1 mm copper filtering. Animals were positioned inside an 
isoflurane-filled plastic container, directly under the 2 mm thick lid. The setup height was 
adjusted to the dose rate of 5 Gy/min at the tumor position, which was confirmed by the 
ionization chamber measurement (PTW, Freiburg, Germany). Brass collimators of 2.5 cm 
thickness with 1.5×1.2 cm oval openings were used to shield the animal bodies, only exposing 
the tumor-bearing neck areas. Five animals each were irradiated with 20 or 15 Gy.  
Monte Carlo  
An extensive FLUKA Monte Carlo simulation study was conducted to support both the 
experiment design and its data analysis. The simulations assisted in designing beamline 
components, including the 2D range modulator, collimator, and mouse compensator, and in 
developing shielding strategies to protect the SIRMIO PET scanner from radiation damage. As 
in our previous BARB dosimetry study FLUKA simulations were also used to verify dosimetry 
measurements and support beam model characterization54. 
Expected dose and positron annihilation maps inside the mice body were simulated by 
importing the μCT scans with their original resolution in a voxel FLUKA geometry. We applied 
a Gaussian filter with a 1 mm standard deviation (σ) to the resulting images, reported in Fig. 
3A-B, and compared them with the measured PET images, in Fig. 3C. For this purpose the full 
experimental setup was implemented into the FLUKA geometry. A customized USRMED 
routine was used to simulate the range modulator. Dose and positron annihilation map 
distributions were simulated on mice µCTs, which were also used for PET image co-
registration and irradiation planning (Fig. 3A-B). For greater accuracy, specific calibration, 
 
12 
including the mouse bed and compensator, was applied to all simulated µCTs. 
In-beam PET  
A novel spherical, high resolution PET scanner developed at LMU in the framework of the 
SIRMIO project was used to measure the RIB implantation in-beam during irradiation. The 
SIRMIO PET scanner features 56 3-layer depth-of-interaction (DOI) detectors arranged in a 
spherical shape with an inner diameter of 72 mm. Each DOI PET detector consists of a LYSO 
scintillator block with a pixel size of 0.9 mm readout by an 8×8 SiPM array. A charge division 
circuit and a custom-made amplifier circuit board developed at National Institutes for Quantum 
Science and Technology (Chiba, Japan) are used to reduce the 64 signals from the SiPM array 
to 4 signals. The data are then acquired by a customized DAQ software using two R5560 
digitizers (CAEN, Italy). In order to enable image-guided irradiation for the BARB project, the 
data acquisition and reconstruction software were tailored to stream out and reconstruct the list 
mode data with user-defined time intervals, set in this experiment to cycles of 60 seconds. This 
feature enables visualizing the reconstructed stopping position of the beam almost “real-time” 
during the irradiation, along with the monitoring of the irradiation build up and decay through 
a graphical user interface. For this specific on-the-fly application, the image reconstruction was 
based on an in-house developed ordered subset expectation maximization (OSEM) algorithm, 
with a reduced number of iterations and limited size of the field of view for the sake of 
computational speed during the experiment. However, the 3D activity maps and washout 
analyses used for the reported results were based on a more time-consuming 3D maximum 
likelihood expectation maximization (MLEM) with relevant corrections for sensitivity and 
random coincidences.  
Tumor growth  
Starting one week after the injection, tumor dimensions were measured with a caliper twice per 
week for 28 days after the irradiation. Assuming the ellipsoid shape of the tumor, the volume 
was calculated as  
𝑉= 4
3 𝜋𝑎𝑏𝑐 
where a and b are the measured length and width of the tumor, respectively, and c (depth) is 
assumed to be the average of a and b. 
Toxicity assays  
Skin toxicity scoring. The toxicity of the skin in the irradiated area was scored using a 
simplified grading system of the Gesellschaft für Versuchstierkunde (GV-SOLAS) guidelines, 
divided by five grades (0: no effect; 1: redness; 2: dry skin and desquamation; 3: closed, healing 
wound; 4: open wound, not healing; 5: necrosis). Grade 5 was never observed during the 
experiment, and the termination criteria was reached when the animals showed a grade 4 and 
did not heal after the application of a topical treatment (Bepanthen®, Bayer). The treatment 
healed successfully the animals with a grade 3 after irradiation. 
Grip test. The grip test was performed to measure the strength of the animals´ forelimbs after 
 
13 
irradiation. Animals were acclimatized to refined handling techniques to reduce stress and 
optimize the data collection. We used the Grip Strength Meter-47200 ( Ugo Basile®) equipped 
with a T-bar. The animals were lifted by the tail and suspended over the bar, then lowered to 
reach a horizontal position and gently pulled back until the grasp was released. Upon release, 
the peak force (in newton) was recorded. To get consistent data and avoid habituation to the 
task, the first three measurements in which the animal successfully grabbed the bar with both 
forelimbs were recorded and averaged. 
Kyphosis scoring. To score the overall appearance and health status of the animals, videos were 
recorded in a house-made setup consisting of a starting box, a transparent-walled corridor, and 
a loop structure at the end, where the animals could enter and go back to the corridor. The 
animals were observed for spontaneous walking, grooming behavior and posture during 
stationary and movement phases. To evaluate the kyphosis, we used the scoring system from 
Yerger et al.59 where in grade 0 there is no persistent kyphosis and the mouse can always 
straighten the spine; 1: mild kyphosis exhibited during stationary phase, but the spine is 
straightened during locomotion; 2: persistent mild kyphosis even during movement, the spine 
cannot be straightened completely; 3: the kyphosis is always maintained and well pronounced. 
 
 
14 
References 
1. 
Durante, M. & Paganetti, H. Nuclear physics in particle therapy : a review. Reports 
Prog. Phys. 79, 096702 (2016). 
2. 
PTCOG. Particle therapy facilities in operation. (2024). Available at: 
https://www.ptcog.ch/. (Accessed: 2nd September 2024) 
3. 
Durante, M., Debus, J. & Loeffler, J. S. Physics and biomedical challenges of cancer 
therapy with accelerated heavy ions. Nat. Rev. Phys. 3, 777–790 (2021). 
4. 
Lomax, A. J. Myths and realities of range uncertainty. Br. J. Radiol. 93, 20190582 
(2020). 
5. 
Parodi, K. & Polf, J. C. In vivo range verification in particle therapy. Med. Phys. 45, 
e1036–e1050 (2018). 
6. 
Parodi, K., Yamaya, T. & Moskal, P. Experience and new prospects of PET imaging 
for ion beam therapy monitoring. Z. Med. Phys. 33, 22–34 (2023). 
7. 
Enghardt, W. et al. Charged hadron tumour therapy monitoring by means of PET. 
Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. 
Equip. 525, 284–288 (2004). 
8. 
Bauer, J. et al. Implementation and initial clinical experience of offline PET/CT-based 
verification of scanned carbon ion treatment. Radiother. Oncol. 107, 218–226 (2013). 
9. 
Kraan, A. C. et al. In-beam PET treatment monitoring of carbon therapy patients: 
Results of a clinical trial at CNAO. Phys. Medica 125, 104493 (2024). 
10. 
Jenkins, D. G. Recent advances in nuclear physics through on-line isotope separation. 
Nat. Phys. 10, 909–913 (2014). 
11. 
Blumenfeld, Y., Nilsson, T. & Van Duppen, P. Facilities and methods for radioactive 
ion beam production. Phys. Scr. T152, 014023 (2013). 
12. 
Bertulani, C. A. & Gade, A. Nuclear astrophysics with radioactive beams. Phys. Rep. 
485, 195–259 (2010). 
13. 
Chacon, A. et al. Experimental investigation of the characteristics of radioactive beams 
for heavy ion therapy. Med. Phys. 47, 3123–3132 (2020). 
14. 
Chacon, A. et al. Monte Carlo investigation of the characteristics of radioactive beams 
for heavy ion therapy. Sci. Rep. 9, 6537 (2019). 
15. 
Boscolo, D. et al. Radioactive Beams for Image-Guided Particle Therapy: The BARB 
Experiment at GSI. Front. Oncol. 11, (2021). 
16. 
Mohammadi, A. et al. Range verification of radioactive ion beams of 11 C and 15 O 
using in-beam PET imaging. Phys. Med. Biol. 64, 145014 (2019). 
17. 
Sokol, O. et al. Potential benefits of using radioactive ion beams for range margin 
reduction in carbon ion therapy. Sci. Rep. 12, 21792 (2022). 
18. 
Chatterjee, A., Alpen, E. L., Tobias, C. A., Llacer, J. & Alonso, J. High energy beams 
of radioactive nuclei and their biomedical applications. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. 7, 503–
507 (1981). 
 
15 
19. 
Durante, M. & Parodi, K. Radioactive Beams in Particle Therapy: Past, Present, and 
Future. Front. Phys. 8, 00326 (2020). 
20. 
Durante, M., Golubev, A., Park, W.-Y. & Trautmann, C. Applied nuclear physics at 
the new high-energy particle accelerator facilities. Phys. Rep. 800, 1–37 (2019). 
21. 
Durante, M. et al. All the fun of the FAIR: fundamental physics at the facility for 
antiproton and ion research. Phys. Scr. 94, 033001 (2019). 
22. 
Kostyleva, D. et al. Precision of the PET activity range during irradiation with 10 C, 
11 C, and 12 C beams. Phys. Med. Biol. 68, 015003 (2023). 
23. 
Purushothaman, S. et al. Quasi-real-time range monitoring by in-beam PET: a case for 
15O. Sci. Rep. 13, 18788 (2023). 
24. 
Haettner, E. et al. Production and separation of positron emitters for hadron therapy at 
FRS-Cave M. Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B Beam Interact. with 
Mater. Atoms 541, 114–116 (2023). 
25. 
Gerlach, S. et al. Beam characterization and feasibility study for a small animal 
irradiation platform at clinical proton therapy facilities. Phys. Med. Biol. 65, 245045 
(2020). 
26. 
Lovatti, G. et al. Design study of a novel geometrical arrangement for an in-beam 
small animal positron emission tomography scanner. Phys. Med. Biol. 68, 235005 
(2023). 
27. 
Asai, T. et al. Establishment and characterization of a murine osteosarcoma cell line 
(LM8) with high metastatic potential to the lung. Int. J. Cancer 76, 418–422 (1998). 
28. 
Prudowsky, Z. D. & Yustein, J. T. Recent Insights into Therapy Resistance in 
Osteosarcoma. Cancers (Basel). 13, 83 (2020). 
29. 
Shiba, S. et al. Impact of Carbon Ion Radiotherapy on Inoperable Bone Sarcoma. 
Cancers (Basel). 13, 1099 (2021). 
30. 
Lo, Y.-C., McBride, W. H. & Rodney Withers, H. The effect of single doses of 
radiation on mouse spinal cord. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. 22, 57–63 (1992). 
31. 
Geissel, H. et al. The GSI projectile fragment separator (FRS): a versatile magnetic 
system for relativistic heavy ions. Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B Beam 
Interact. with Mater. Atoms 70, 286–297 (1992). 
32. 
Böhlen, T. T. et al. The FLUKA Code: Developments and Challenges for High Energy 
and Medical Applications. Nucl. Data Sheets 120, 211–214 (2014). 
33. 
Anderson, K. D., Abdul, M. & Steward, O. Quantitative assessment of deficits and 
recovery of forelimb motor function after cervical spinal cord injury in mice. Exp. 
Neurol. 190, 184–191 (2004). 
34. 
Toramatsu, C. et al. Measurement of biological washout rates depending on tumor 
vascular status in 15 O in-beam rat-PET. Phys. Med. Biol. 67, 125006 (2022). 
35. 
Baumann, M., Krause, M. & Hill, R. Exploring the role of cancer stem cells in 
radioresistance. Nat Rev Cancer 8, 545–554 (2008). 
36. 
Garcia-Barros, M. et al. Tumor response to radiotherapy regulated by endothelial cell 
 
16 
apoptosis. Science 300, 1155–9 (2003). 
37. 
Fuks, Z. & Kolesnick, R. Engaging the vascular component of the tumor response. 
Cancer Cell 8, 89–91 (2005). 
38. 
Bodo, S. et al. Single-dose radiotherapy disables tumor cell homologous 
recombination via ischemia/reperfusion injury. J. Clin. Invest. 129, 786–801 (2019). 
39. 
Greco, C. et al. Safety and Efficacy of Virtual Prostatectomy With Single-Dose 
Radiotherapy in Patients With Intermediate-Risk Prostate Cancer. JAMA Oncol. 7, 700 
(2021). 
40. 
Zelefsky, M. J. et al. Phase 3 Multi-Center, Prospective, Randomized Trial Comparing 
Single-Dose 24 Gy Radiation Therapy to a 3-Fraction SBRT Regimen in the 
Treatment of Oligometastatic Cancer. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. 110, 672–679 (2021). 
41. 
Shuryak, I., Carlson, D. J., Brown, J. M. & Brenner, D. J. High-dose and fractionation 
effects in stereotactic radiation therapy: Analysis of tumor control data from 2965 
patients. Radiother. Oncol. 115, 327–334 (2015). 
42. 
Brown, J. M., Brenner, D. J. & Carlson, D. J. Dose escalation, not ‘new biology,’ can 
account for the efficacy of stereotactic body radiation therapy with non-small cell lung 
cancer. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 85, 1159–1160 (2013). 
43. 
Park, H. J., Griffin, R. J., Hui, S., Levitt, S. H. & Song, C. W. Radiation-Induced 
Vascular Damage in Tumors: Implications of Vascular Damage in Ablative 
Hypofractionated Radiotherapy (SBRT and SRS). Radiat. Res. 177, 311–327 (2012). 
44. 
Bendinger, A. L. et al. High Doses of Photons and Carbon Ions Comparably Increase 
Vascular Permeability in R3327-HI Prostate Tumors: A Dynamic Contrast-Enhanced 
MRI Study. Radiat. Res. 194, (2020). 
45. 
Jani, A. et al. High-Dose, Single-Fraction Irradiation Rapidly Reduces Tumor 
Vasculature and Perfusion in a Xenograft Model of Neuroblastoma. Int. J. Radiat. 
Oncol. 94, 1173–1180 (2016). 
46. 
Kalantar-Nayestanaki, N. & Scheidenberger, C. Experiments at the Interface of 
Nuclear, Atomic, and Hadron Physics with FRS at GSI and Super-FRS at FAIR. Nucl. 
Phys. News 34, 21–26 (2024). 
47. 
Mohammadi, A. et al. Influence of momentum acceptance on range monitoring of 11 
C and 15 O ion beams using in-beam PET. Phys. Med. Biol. 65, 125006 (2020). 
48. 
Hamato, A. et al. Dose estimation using in-beam positron emission tomography: 
Demonstration for 11C and 15O ion beams. Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. 
Sect. A Accel. Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. Equip. 1066, 169643 (2024). 
49. 
Penescu, L. et al. Technical Design Report for a Carbon-11 Treatment Facility. Front. 
Med. 8, (2022). 
50. 
Augusto, R. S. et al. New developments of 11C post-accelerated beams for hadron 
therapy and imaging. Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B Beam Interact. 
with Mater. Atoms 376, 374–378 (2016). 
51. 
Tashima, H. et al. A single-ring OpenPET enabling PET imaging during radiotherapy. 
Phys. Med. Biol. 57, 4705–4718 (2012). 
 
17 
52. 
Moglioni, M. et al. In-vivo range verification analysis with in-beam PET data for 
patients treated with proton therapy at CNAO. Front. Oncol. 12, (2022). 
53. 
Toramatsu, C. et al. Tumour status prediction by means of carbon-ion beam 
irradiation: comparison of washout rates between in-beam PET and DCE-MRI in rats. 
Phys. Med. Biol. 68, 195005 (2023). 
54. 
Boscolo, D. et al. Depth dose measurements in water for 11C and 10C beams with 
therapy relevant energies. Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. 
Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. Equip. 1043, 167464 (2022). 
55. 
Luoni, F. et al. Beam Monitor Calibration for Radiobiological Experiments With 
Scanned High Energy Heavy Ion Beams at FAIR. Front. Phys. 8, (2020). 
56. 
Schuy, C., Simeonov, Y., Durante, M., Zink, K. & Weber, U. Technical note: Vendor‐
agnostic water phantom for 3D dosimetry of complex fields in particle therapy. J. 
Appl. Clin. Med. Phys. 21, 227–232 (2020). 
57. 
Kikinis, R., Pieper, S. D. & Vosburgh, K. G. 3D Slicer: A Platform for Subject-
Specific Image Analysis, Visualization, and Clinical Support. in Intraoperative 
Imaging and Image-Guided Therapy 277–289 (Springer New York, 2014). 
doi:10.1007/978-1-4614-7657-3_19 
58. 
Downey, C. M. et al. Quantitative Ex-Vivo Micro-Computed Tomographic Imaging of 
Blood Vessels and Necrotic Regions within Tumors. PLoS One 7, e41685 (2012). 
59. 
Yerger, J. et al. Phenotype assessment for neurodegenerative murine models with 
ataxia and application to Niemann–Pick disease, type C1. Biol. Open 11, (2022). 
 
 
 
 
18 
Acknowledgements 
The BARB experiments are supported by European Research Council (ERC) Advanced Grant 
883425 BARB to M.D. The construction of the SIRMIO PET scanner was partly supported by 
the ERC Consolidator Grant 725539 SIRMIO to K.P. The measurements described here are 
performed within the experiments B-22-00046-Durante at SIS18/FRS/Cave-M at the GSI 
Helmholtzzentrum für Schwerionenforschung, Darmstadt (Germany) in the frame of FAIR 
Phase-0. The authors are grateful to: the SIS18 accelerator crew for their excellent support in 
the beam preparation and delivery; R. Chowdhury, L. Hartig, M. Ibáñez-Moragues, J. 
Oppermann, A. Puspitasari-Kokko, and C. Vandevoorde for their assistance in handling the 
animals during irradiations and follow-up;  C. Galeone, R. Kumar Prajapat, G. Li, M.C. Martire 
and L. Volz for their assistance during the beamtime shifts; S. Kumar Singh prepared the 
settings for 11C; A.L. Gera, C.  Hartmann-Sauter, T. Wagner and R. Khan for the beamline setup 
realization and installation; E. Rocco refurbished the grids needed for beam alignment; A. Noto 
for working on the SIRMIO PET during the irradiation; A. Bückner for his support with CT 
and calibrations; B. Franczak for the optical calculations that make possible the transfer of the 
RIB in Cave M;  K. Zink for providing the PeakFinder tool used in our dosimetry 
measurements; T. Yamaya, H.G. Kang, A. Zoglauer and C. Gianoli for their collaboration on 
the SIRMIO PET scanner and image reconstruction. This paper is dedicated to the memory of 
Prof. Dr. Hans Geissel (1950-2024), whose unwavering support, encouragement, and insightful 
suggestions were invaluable to this research. 
Author information 
D.B. prepared the physics protocol and performed the dosimetry; G.L. is the primary 
responsible for PET data acquisition and analysis; O.S. linked biology and physics protocols, 
performed all CT and performed a large part of the data analysis; T.V. worked on the animals, 
tumor growth and performed all toxicity tests; F.E., M.N. and P.G.T. worked on the PET 
detector and data acquisition; E.H., S.P., and D.K. were responsible of the secondary beam 
production at FRS; W.T. supervised the animal model and participated in the experiments; C.G. 
provided essential conceptual input and participated in the experiments; U.W. and C. Schuy 
performed the beam dosimetry; M.M. performed the FLUKA simulations; J.B. prepared the 
animal holder; C. Scheidenberger supervised all FRS activities and is responsible for 
production, separation and identification of the RIB; K.P. conceived and supervised the 
realization of the SIRMIO PET scanner, participated in all experiments and supported the 
interpretation and analysis of the PET data; M.D. conceived and supervised the BARB project, 
participated in every phase of the experiments, analyzed part of the data and wrote the first 
draft of the paper; all authors read and revised the manuscript. 
 
Ethics declarations 
Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
19 
Figure captions 
 
Figure 1. Mouse model and CT. A. LM8 osteosarcoma as visible by eye or at the CT at 
different times after cell inoculation. For the irradiation, a two-weeks timepoint was 
chosen. B. Contours of the individual mice tumor GTVs (green) near the OAR (spinal 
cord). The “universal CTV” contour (purple) was applied to all animals. 
Figure 2. Experimental beamline. A. Drawing of the different elements along the 
experimental beamline. B. Animal holder with the anesthesia tubes and a mouse in 
position. C. Animal holder aligned in the beamline while the SIRMIO PET is raised. D. 
SIRMIO is then lowered to surround the animal. E. Lateral view of the full beamline.   
Figure 3. RIB imaging. A. FLUKA simulation of the beamline in Fig.2 shows the expected 
11C-ion dose (in Gy) distribution in the mouse on a z-y plane parallel to the beam. The 
universal CTV contour (Fig. 1) is highlighted with red line. B. FLUKA simulation of the 
integrated positron annihilation map in the same animal in panel A. C. Real-time 
SIRMIO PET image of the integrated activity distribution deposited after 3 min 11C-
irradiation in the same mouse. D. For the same mouse, measured activity (blue) and 
simulated positron annihilation map (red) activity integrated along the x-axis plotted 
with the dose profile along the beam direction (z) in green. The tumor and spine regions 
are highlighted by pink and red bands, respectively, while the collar is depicted in yellow 
and the dimple (see Extended Fig. 4B) in light blue. 
Figure 4. Tumor growth. A. Estimated volume from 2D caliper measurements of the visible 
tumor (see Methods). Asterisks indicate statistical significance using the ANOVA test. 
B. Measurements of the volumes using CT. Data are more precise than caliper 
measurements, but they are less frequent than external measurements. C. Zoom of the 
data points for irradiated groups shows the recurrence of the tumor irradiated with 5 Gy. 
Bars are standard errors of the mean values from the different animals. 
Figure 5. Toxicity vs. activity in the spinal cord. Animals exposed to 11C-ions shows a lower 
forelimb strength in the grip test (Extended data Fig. 7) compared to controls. Individual 
data are shown in Supplementary Fig. 2. Data for irradiated animals were only 
considered from week 6, assuming no radiation effect in the first month post-irradiation. 
A. Median grip strength values in the control (8 animals) and irradiated (13 animals) 
groups. Bars are standard errors of the median values (= 1.2533 ∙𝜎/√𝑛) . Median 
strength in the control group is significantly higher than in the irradiated group (Mood’s 
median test, p=0.0152). B. Fraction of time points (Supplementary Fig. 2) where the 
measured peak force F was lower than 100 N. Bars are standard errors of the mean. The 
fraction is significantly higher in irradiated animals (Mann-Whitney test, p=0.00024). 
C. Correlation between median grip strength values in single irradiated animals and total 
PET counts in the spinal cord. D. Correlation between fraction of tests with F<100 N in 
individual irradiated animals  and total PET counts in the spinal cord. Each point 
represents a single animal. The grey area is the 95% CI around the regression line, r is 
 
20 
the correlation coefficient and significance of the correlation was evaluated by Pearson’s 
test both in C and D panels. 
Figure 6. Radioactive washout. Individual activity data recorded after the end of irradiation 
in Supplementary Fig. 3 are grouped in the upper panel (left: 5 Gy, middle: 20 Gy, right: 
comparison of fit functions assuming the physics decay of the beam containing 96% 11C, 
3% 10C, and 0.5% 15O ions). As a fit function, a double-exponential decay function was 
chosen over a single-exponential decay following the results of the F-test (ratio of the 
fit 2 with 1 or 2 parameters) with number of degrees of freedom df > 100. F(5 Gy) = 
1126 (≫1), F(20 Gy)=63 (≫1). Double-exponential decay rates and the weight of the 
slow component are shown in the bottom panel for 5 Gy and 20 Gy. Significance of the 
differences is assessed by t-test, and p-values are shown. 
 
 
 
21 
Extended data 
Extended data Fig. 1. Fragment separator at GSI. A schematic view of the FRS is shown. 
A primary beam of 12C-ions from the SIS-18 synchrotron was incident on a beryllium 
target to produce 11C-ions, separated using the Bρ-ΔE-Bρ method. An achromatic 
degrader was placed at the mid-focal plane of the FRS, . The FRS has three experimental 
branches for delivering the separated radioactive ion beam. The branch directed to Cave-
M is indicated in the figure. The elements between the last dipole of the FRS and Cave-
M belong to the high-energy beam transport line of GSI, designed for primary beams 
and therefore having smaller apertures than the FRS magnetic elements, leading to 
reduced transmission efficiency of secondary beams to the Cave-M. 
Extended data Fig. 2. Dosimetry of the monoenergetic 11C beam. Laterally integrated depth 
dose profile in water (top left), 2D dose distribution of the beam spot at the entrance of 
the water phantom (bottom left), vertical and horizontal 2D dose distributions in the 
central plane along the beam direction (top right and bottom right) for the  pristine Bragg 
peak. 
Extended data Fig. 3. Dosimetry of the SOBP. Laterally integrated depth dose profile in 
water (top left), 2D dose distribution of the beam spot at the entrance of the water 
phantom (bottom left),  vertical and horizontal 2D dose distributions in the central plane 
along the beam direction (top right and bottom right) for the SOBP.  
Extended Data Fig. 4. Cave M beamline components.  The scheme of the beamline is shown 
in Fig. 2A. A. Range modulator used to generate the SOBP from a monoenergetic pencil 
beam scan. B. Plastic compensator to shape the lateral and distal edges of the irradiation 
field to the CTV. The length is 25 mm to shield the base of the skull and the rest of the 
animal spine. Top: inner side with an anatomical cut for fixing the animal neck area 
Bottom: outer side with a dimple corresponding to the distal edge of the CTV calculated 
in water-equivalent thickness. 
Extended data Fig. 5. Treatment of the mouse osteosarcoma with 20 Gy X-rays. A. Tumour 
growth curve, showing full tumor control after 20 Gy (5 mice, bars are standard errors 
of the mean values). B. Image of a mouse 6 months after exposure to 20 Gy X-rays 
suffering severe weight loss and kyphosis (see also Supplementary video 3). C. Pooled 
weights of tumor-bearing animals after receiving X-rays (orange circles, 15 and 20 Gy) 
or 11C treatment (blue squares; 20 Gy). Lines represent the linear fit of the data from 
each group. The slope coefficients are 0.215±0.046 and 0.525±0.019 for the X-ray 
and 11C groups, respectively and they are significantly different (t-test, p<0.0001). 
According to the ethical protocol, animals losing >10% of the weight have to be 
scarified, and for this reason some data acquisition is stopped early. The weight loss and 
myelopathy in these mice is due to the high dose to spine and esophagus of the X-ray 
beam that goes through the tumor. 
Extended data Fig. 6. Skin toxicity in animals exposed to 5 and 20 Gy 11C-ions. The Table 
shows the severity scale, and the images gives examples of the observed toxicities in the 
irradiated area. Grade 4 was only observed in control animals and was caused by 
 
22 
excessive tumour growth. Those animals had to be scarified as specified in the ethical 
protocol. 
Extended data Fig. 7. Grip strength test used to estimate the cervical myelopathy. A. In 
this quantitative test the animal is pulled by the tail and the strength of the grip on the 
bar is measured in newton (N). B. Control mouse during the test (lateral view). C. 20 
Gy irradiated mouse during the test. The area behind the head is shaved prior to the 
tumor inoculation, and after the irradiation only some white fur grows back. 
 
Extended Data Table 1. Summary of the beam parameters used in the experiments. 
Spill length 
200 ms  
Duty cycle 
6.25% 
12C beam energy 
300 MeV/u 
11C beam energy 
209 MeV/u 
12C intensity in SIS18 
1.61010 particles/spill 
11C intensity in Cave M 
2.5106 particles/spill 
Beamspot shape 
Horizontal direction: 2.335 cm FWHM 
Vertical direction: 1.415 cm FWHM 
Momentum spread 
60% Gaussian – FWHM=0.011 GeV/cu 
40% flat distribution: FWHM=0.018 GeV/cu 
 
 
1
2 weeks after the injection
Fig.1
Universal CTV
Individual 
GTVs
5 mm
12 mm
4 weeks after the injection
1 week after the injection
2 weeks after the injection
3 weeks after the injection
4 weeks after the injection
A
B
Figure 2A
A
Figure 2B-D
B
C
D
Compensator
Mouse holder
Mouse holder
Collimator
Pre-
Collimator
SIRMIO PET
SIRMIO PET
E
Figure 2E
Exit Window
Beam 
Monitors
Range 
shifter
Pre-collimator
Collimator
Energy 
degrader
SIRMIO-PET
A
B
C
Figure 3 A-C
Figure 3 D
Figure 4
A
B
C
Figure 5 A-B
A
B
Figure 5 C-D
D
C
5 Gy (7 animals)
5 vs. 20 Gy fitted curves
Figure 6
20 Gy (8 animals)
Extended Data Fig. 1
Extended Data Fig. 2
Extended Data Fig. 3
Extended Data Fig. 4
A
B
Extended Data Fig. 5
A
B
C
Grade 5
Necrosis
Grade 4
Open wound not healing, leading to 
sacrifice of the animal
Grade 3
Closed wound or small scratch
Grade 2
Dry skin, desquamation
Grade 1
Redness
Grade 0
No effect
Extended Data Fig. 6
Grade 2
Grade 3
Grade 4
Grade 1
Extended Data Fig. 7
C
B
A
Supplementary material 
 
Supplementary Figures 
Supplementary Figure 1. PET images of individual mice. Measured activity for all irradiated 
mice. All images show the final activity. For the time-dependent images, see Supplementary 
video 1. 
Supplementary Figure 2. Grip strength test of individual mice. Grip test (Extended data 
Fig. 6) was performed every 2 weeks up to 6 months post-irradiation. A. Sham-irradiated mice. 
All data were used to calculate median grip performance and fraction of time points with F<100 
N shown in Fig. 5. B. Irradiated mice. Here only data from week 6 were used to calculate 
median grip strength and fraction of time points with F<100 N, considering that myelopathy 
has a latency of at least one month. Bars are standard deviations on three separate 
measurements for each mouse. 
Supplementary Figure 3. Washout in individual mice. Washout data for all mice exposed 
to either 5 or 20 Gy 11C-ions. One mouse from the 5 Gy group was excluded from the 
analysis because parameters were >3  far from the pooled data of the others.  
 
 
 
Supplementary videos 
 
Supplementary video 1. 11C activity in irradiated mouse. Real-time build-up of the PET 
signal during mouse irradiation. The image is overlapped to the mouse CT in sagittal (left) and 
transversal (right) views. Time and dose are also indicated. 
 
Supplementary video 2. X-ray toxicity. Example of kyphosis (cervical myelopathy grade 3) 
in a mouse treated with 20 Gy X-rays (left). Tumor was controlled, but the neurotoxicity is 
clearly visible. A control mouse is shown on the right for comparison. 
 
Supplementary video 3. Vascular structure of the tumor. 3D rendering of the vascular 
structure of the LM8 osteosarcoma tumor as visualized in CT after staining with Vascupaint. 
Quantitative values are shown in the table. 
 
Single 
mouse
plots
0 Gy
Supplementary 
Fig. 2A
Single 
mouse
plots
20 Gy
Supp. 
Fig. 2B
Supplementary Fig. 3
20 Gy, double-exp fit, tlong = 400 s
5 Gy, double-exp fit, tlong = 400  s
Outlier in terms of fit params, 
excluded from comparison
Assuming 
96% 11C
3% 10C
0.5% 15O
from MC
