Primary measurement of massic activity of Am-241 by cryogenic decay energy 
spectrometery  
Ryan P. Fitzgerald, Bradley Alpert, Denis E. Bergeron, Max Carlson, Richard Essex, Sean 
Jollota, Kelsey Morgan, Shin Muramoto, Svetlana Nour, Galen O’Neil, Daniel R. Schmidt, 
Gordon Shaw, Daniel Swetz, and R. Michael Verkouteren 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, 100 Bureau Drive, Gaithersburg, MD USA 
 
Keywords 
radionuclide metrology; quantitative analysis; radioactivity; decay energy spectrometry; 
cryogenic calorimetry; inkjet gravimetry; transition edge sensor; TES 
 
Abstract 
We demonstrate a method for radionuclide assay that is spectroscopic with 100 % counting 
efficiency for alpha decay. Advancing both cryogenic decay energy spectrometry (DES) and 
drop-on-demand inkjet metrology, a solution of Am-241 was assayed for massic activity (Bq/g) 
with a relative combined standard uncertainty less than 1 %. We implement live-timed counting, 
spectroscopic analysis, validation by liquid scintillation (LS) counting, and confirmation of 
quantitative solution transfer. Experimental DES spectra are well modeled with a Monte Carlo 
simulation. The model was further used to simulate Pu-238 and Pu-240 impurities, calculate 
detection limits, and demonstrate the potential for tracer-free multi-nuclide analysis, which will 
be valuable for new cancer therapeutics based on decay chains, Standard Reference Materials 
(SRMs) containing impurities, and more widely in nuclear energy, environmental monitoring, 
security, and forensics.  
 
1. Introduction 
We present a new spectroscopic capability for quantifying radionuclides in solution. Radionuclide 
standards must be based on primary reference measurements, meaning that the methods are 
internally consistent, self-calibrating, and not dependent on any measurement standard for a 
quantity (i.e., Bq) of the same kind [1]. Existing primary methods for radioactivity measurements 
are generally not spectroscopic, so are limited to single-radionuclide solutions and rely on 
secondary measurements by other methods to identify, quantify, and place limits on radionuclidic 
impurities that can cause bias in the primary measurement [2]. We demonstrate a new primary 
method for measuring activity of microgram quantities of samples that may contain multiple 
radionuclides, such as environmental samples, cancer therapeutics based on decay chains, and 
samples containing radionuclidic impurities. Here we perform a primary standardization of Am-
241 massic activity and place limits on alpha-emitting impurities. 
The new approach is based on quantum devices called transition-edge sensors (TES). The basic 
operational principle involves cooling an absorber to just below is superconducting transition 
temperature, 𝑇𝐶, so that miniscule amounts of absorbed energy result in a very large increase in 
electrical resistance [3]. In recent years, TESs have become familiar in multiple fields of science 
from space-based astronomy to laboratory atomic, ion, and plasma physics where they have 
radically improved sensitivity and resolution in x-ray spectroscopy [4]. Decay Energy 
Spectrometry (DES) using TES and other cryogenic sensors (such as magnetic microcalorimeters 
[MMCs]) has great potential for absolute activity measurements for alpha [5], beta[6], electron 
capture [7], and mixed decays [8], achieving spectral resolving powers of up to 5000 [9]. In DES, 
the energy of a single radioactive decay is captured in an absorber and measured with a TES. 
Because the total energy (Q) of the nuclear decay is measured (in ideal cases), DES is sometimes 
referred to as Q-spec [9]. Among other efforts, a European consortium called Prima-LTD has 
achieved significant progress toward their stated goal of measuring absolute activity with low-
temperature detectors [10]. 
Here, we report advances in DES measurements, pulse processing with live-timed spectroscopic 
analysis, and drop-on-demand inkjet gravimetry that enable a fully-realized DES-based 
standardization of an Am-241 solution for massic activity (Bq/g), achieving uncertainties that are 
competitive with established primary methods.  
 
2. Method 
2.1 Materials 
The stock solution of Am-241 was in ≈ 1 mol/L nitric acid having nominal massic activity of 
1.5×105 Bq/g at the reference date 1 September 2022. Extremely small aliquots of solution (< 10 
µg) were dispensed (Section 2.2) for cryogenic DES measurements (Section 2.3). Larger (≈ 50 
mg) aliquots were dispensed by traditional methods for validation measurements using  non-
spectroscopic liquid scintillation counting (Section 2.4).  
For this first demonstration, Am-241 was chosen as it decays purely by alpha decay (rather than 
beta decay or electron capture), mostly to the ground state of Np-237 [11, 12]. The resulting 
alpha particle and Np-237 recoil nucleus come to rest in the gold absorber, depositing their 
kinetic energies. There is a significant alpha decay branch to an excited state of Np-237 that 
sometimes results in the emission of a low-energy (≈ 60 keV) gamma ray that may be absorbed 
in the gold sample or may escape. This escape provides a useful test of our spectral analysis 
methods. 
The Am-241 solution was deposited (Section 2.2) onto foils with nanoporous gold (npAu) 
surface films to create the DES sources. The npAu films had a thickness of (1.6 ± 0.1) µm, an 
average pore diameter of (44 ± 13) nm, and a porosity of approximately 21 % (Figure 1). 
Volumetric solute transfer was confirmed by depositing an aqueous nitric acid solution 
containing 5 µg/g CsNO3, followed by secondary ion mass spectrometry depth profiling to track 
the presence of Cs+ ions as a function of film depth. The Cs was a non-radioactive surrogate for 
Am, and the concentration used was significantly higher to ensure detection using the technique.  
 
Figure 1. SEM images showing the surface structure of the nanoporous Au 
(npAu) film (left), and the cross section of the film after FIB cross sectioning 
(right). These npAu films ((1.6 ± 0.1) µm in thickness) were deposited onto Si 
wafers to facilitate analysis using advanced surface analytical tools. Using the 
imaging software, the average diameter of the pores on the surface of the films 
were measured to be (44 ± 13) nm with a porosity of 21 %, while those from the 
cross section were (47 ± 26) nm and 18 %, respectively, and shows the uniformity 
of the porous structure.  
Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) depth profiles were obtained using an IONTOF IV 
instrument (Münster, Germany) equipped with a 30 keV Bi+ liquid metal ion source for both 
analysis and sputtering. Depth profiling was performed in non-interlaced mode, where 50 scans 
of analysis in pulsed beam mode and 75 scans of sputtering in continuous beam mode are 
operated in separately per cycle, with both beams kept inside a (500 × 500) µm area. The 
sputtering ion dose was 3.6 × 1015 ions/cm2 at a current of 11.9 nA per cycle. To prevent pillar-
like topography from changing the sputter rate, sample rotation was performed with the 6-axis 
stage equipped with the instrument and was rotated by 90° after every cycle [13].  Crater depth 
measurements were performed using the Dektak XT stylus profilometer (Bruker Corporation, 
Tucson, AZ) equipped with a 2.5 µm radius stylus tip. A 2 mm line scan was used to ensure that 
a large enough region outside the crater was measured to provide sufficient area for leveling.  
The distribution of the Cs was fairly uniform throughout the entire thickness of the film (Figure 
2). The npAu films were subsequently cut into 2.4 mm squares using a laser cutter and cleaned 
again using nitric acid to eliminate ambient carbon contamination before inkjet deposition. 
 
 
Figure 2. Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) depth profile showing the 
relative concentration of Cs+, Ag+, and Ti+ ions inside the npAu film as a function 
of sputtered depth. The intensities were normalized to the Au+ ions to correct for 
the preferential sputtering effect at the initial transient region. Note that the 
intensity is plotted on a log scale, and the position of the Ti interface occurs 
around a depth of 1.5 µm at 50% of the maximum intensity.  
2.2 Gravimetric Inkjet Dispensing 
Inkjet dispensing was performed using a metrology-level Jetlab 4 tabletop printer (Microfab 
Technologies, Plano, TX)* that incorporates an ultramicrobalance to calibrate drop mass before 
and after dispensing onto the npAu DES substrates. Previous work at NIST has established 
procedures for measuring inkjet-dispensed masses with < 1 % relative combined standard 
uncertainty [14-16]. Both DES sources (0.01 mg to 0.1 mg) and liquid-scintillation (LS) sources 
(1 mg to 10 mg) were prepared by inkjet dispensing.  
For the present work, additional steps were taken to mitigate evaporation effects on the measured 
dispensed mass. During mass calibration, the inkjet tip was lowered to a few mm above the 
 
* Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this paper to foster understanding. Such 
identification does not imply recommendation by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor does it 
imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
 
surface of water contained in a gold-plated glass vessel with a ~2 mm diameter opening. 
Previous tests, performed at multiple heights above the liquid to estimate residual evaporation, 
allowed correction for evaporation-in-flight of droplets travelling to the balance vessel.  
To check for evaporative changes in the concentration of the Am-241 solution in the inkjet 
reservoir, LS sources were prepared from the solution before and after preparation of the DES 
sources by both the traditional pycnometer method (larger masses) and by inkjet deposition [17]. 
These LS sources served as a radiometric confirmation of inkjet gravimetry. 
To test for potential losses of radioactive material due to stray satellite droplets of solution or 
leakage from the foil, the “placemat” method described previously[18] was employed. Each of 
six gold foils was placed on a square of hydrogel during dispensing of larger (≈ 1 mg, 16 000 
drop, 160 Bq) aliquots of the Am-241 solution. (The foils for DES were also prepared over gel 
placemats, but the lower activities made detection of any stray material unlikely, so this 
dedicated study with higher activity was undertaken.) After the foil sources dried, each foil and 
gel were placed in their own LS vials and counted in two commercial liquid scintillation counters 
to test for any activity lost from the foil during dispensing or drying.  
Following drying of the inkjet-deposited solution on the nanoporous surface of the foil, each foil 
was folded in half and rolled flat using a manual roller press to encapsulate the source material 
[19]. Each foil was then coated on one side with a thin layer of In-Ga eutectic for thermal contact 
and placed on the 2 mm by 1 mm gold-coated sample pad on a 5 mm by 5 mm TES chip. 
2.3 Decay Energy Spectrometry 
DES was performed using transition-edge sensors (TES) similar to those used for plutonium 
isotopic ratio studies [20]. Since the goal of this work is absolute massic activity of radionuclides 
that are generally well-separated in decay energy, the focus was on simple, quantitative source 
preparation, with modest (for cryogenic sensors) energy resolution of about 5 keV. A dilution 
refrigerator was used to maintain a base temperature of 50 mK. A total of 5 foil-encapsulated 
Am-241 sources and 2 blank foils, mounted on the sample pads of TES chips, were measured on 
multiple occasions. Each chip was voltage-biased to 20 % of the TES normal resistance. Data 
were acquired with commercial SQUID (superconducting quantum interference device) 
amplifiers and analog-to-digital converters (ADCs). Continuous signals were recorded at a 
sample rate of 105 s-1. 
Typical pulses had rise times of 0.2 ms and fall times of 25 ms. Pulse processing consisted of a 
live-timed [21-23] counting algorithm that required an absence of triggers within a fixed time 
before a pulse (traditional live-timing using extending, or paralyzable, dead time [24]) and after a 
pulse (to ensure clean pulses for spectrometry) for the time to be considered live. The imposed 
dead-time was chosen to be longer than any inherent trigger dead-time of the system and to avoid 
nonlinearity of closely piled up pulses. 
The offline pulse processing implementation followed a series of steps: 1) convolve the data with 
a “trigger filter”; 2) note the location of local maxima in the output of 1 as trigger times; 3) 
choose pulses with sufficient time after the previous trigger (imposed deadtime A) and time until 
the next trigger (imposed deadtime B); 4) apply a filter to each pulse to extract a pulse height; 5) 
apply a linear calibration based on the clear Am-241 Q peak. A subset (about 0.3 %) of pulses 
was identified where a gamma ray escaping from the npAu foil interacts with the rest of the TES 
directly; these pulses have a faster-rising edge and a larger proportion of the total pulse area in 
the first 1 ms of the data. The spectroscopic information from these pulses is vastly reduced; 
since the only 𝛾-ray emitting radionuclide identified in this sample was Am-241, those events 
can be assigned as Am-241 decays. In measurements with multiple nuclides, these pulses will not 
be so easily accounted for, so we intend to alter the TES design to reduce the rate of these 
interactions by at least 10x.  
The live time for each pulse included in the final histogram is calculated as the time from the 
trigger before to the trigger after minus the imposed deadtimes A and B. The live time for the 
final histogram is the sum of live times for all pulses included in the histogram. The activity in a 
given region of interest (ROI) is the sum of counts in that ROI divided by the live time of the 
histogram. 
To check that there were no hidden dead-times or double triggering, a histogram of arrival time 
differences between subsequent triggers (Figure 3) was created. The data follow the expected 
exponential distribution for random radioactive decay events. 
 
Figure 3. Histogram of arrival time difference between subsequent pulse triggers. 
Inset shows that the expected linear trend (on log scale) holds down to < 5 ms, 
limited by the trigger filter and pulse rise time. The live-timed counting method  
used extending deadtimes much longer than 5 ms (typically 200 ms)to ensure 
accurate absolute counting. 
In addition, pulses were classified by shape, which indicates when a γ-ray (either from the source 
or background) interacts with the chip without thermalization in the source foil. These 
interactions produce fast pulses that can be distinguished from pulses originating in the source, 
further reducing background in the low-energy portion of the spectrum. 
The resulting DES spectrum was compared to Geant4 [25] Monte Carlo simulations to search for 
any radioactive impurities within the Am-241 energy region of interest (ROI) shown in Figure 4. 
As no impurities were found, the Am-241 count rate was taken as the sum of live counts in the 
Am-241 ROI divided by the live time. Had impurities been present, the impurity spectrum could 
be fit using the Monte Carlo to subtract its contribution to the ROI. 
 
 
Figure 4. Experimental Am-241 spectrum (25 µm foil; 45 h measurement) with 
Geant4 simulation fit (Gaussian width and left exponential tail as free parameters, 
applied to the whole spectrum). The Am-241 decay energy, Q, and escape peaks 
from 𝛾 rays and x rays are indicated. 
2.4 Validation measurements 
The Am-241 solution was assayed for massic activity of Am-241 before and after the DES 
experiment using well-established non-spectroscopic primary methods based on 4πα liquid 
scintillation (LS) counting. LS counting was carried out on commercial instruments and on a 
custom-built three photomultiplier tube counter (often referred to as a “TDCR system”, even 
when the triple-to-double coincidence ratio method is not employed) [26]. γ-ray spectrometry 
[27] measurements were performed to check for photon-emitting radionuclide impurities. 
LS sources were measured in two commercial counters, one operated with an open energy 
window for absolute counting and one operated in a low-background mode, and in a custom-
built TDCR system [26]. The low-background instrument, featuring alpha-beta discrimination, 
was used primarily for the placemat measurements, due to its high sensitivity. The open-window 
counter was used to confirm the Am-241 massic activity before and after the inkjet dispensing of 
DES sources to validate that the massic activity did not change (e.g., due to evaporation in the 
inkjet reservoir). 4π LS counting is a well-established method for non-spectroscopic primary 
standardization of activity when the nuclide and purity of a sample is known and was used for 
live-timed absolute counting [26, 28]. 
3. Results 
3.1 Background and impurities 
Two blank foils were measured for 40 000 s and 160 000 s, with 1 count and 0 counts above 0.5 
MeV, respectively, corresponding to negligible background for Am-241 (Figure 5). The trigger 
threshold was set based on signal-to-noise for each spectrum, corresponding to about 15 keV. No 
evidence of Pu-241 decay (beta endpoint 20.5 keV) was seen. The beta background rate was 
about 6⋅10−4 s-1, which is about 104 × lower than that for LS. Gamma-ray spectrometry 
measurements were carried out for 70 hours and no impurities were found. The most likely 
impurities (Pu isotopes) produce few to no γ-rays, so the DES spectra provide a stronger 
impurity constraint. 
 
Figure 5. DES spectra for an Am-241 source and for a blank foil measured 
concurrently on separate TES chips. The noise cutoffs are about 10 keV and 15 
keV for the Am-241 and blank, respectively. No evidence of Pu-241 (20.5 keV 
endpoint) is seen. The count rate between 20 keV and 200 keV was (4.7 ± 0.8)⋅
10−4 s-1 and (6.8 ± 1.3)⋅10−4 s-1 for the Am-241 and blank, respectively, 
indicating no beta-particle emitting impurities in that region. In the Am-241 
region, there was 1 count in 43000 s of measurement time for the blank, with a 
rate (2.4 ± 0.2)⋅10−5 s-1. A second blank was run for longer with no counts, 
giving an upper limit of ≈6 ⋅10−6 s-1. 
The resolving power for DES was about 150×  that for LS, allowing for detection of potential 
radionuclide impurities by DES (Figure 6). Figure 7 shows simulated spectra containing Pu-240 
and Pu-238 impurities at activity ratios relative to Am-241 of 0.02 % and 0.15 %, respectively. 
The spectral evidence of these low-level impurities illustrates the value of this spectroscopic 
method for, e.g., characterizing Standard Reference Materials (SRM), which typically have 
uncertainties > 0.15 %. No evidence of low-energy beta decays from Pu-241 was observed, 
though the trigger threshold is near the endpoint energy.  
 
 
Figure 6. Comparison of DES and LS spectra for Am-241. (Note log scale vertical 
scale, linear on inset). Both detectors have ≈ 100 % counting efficiency, but DES 
has much higher energy resolution. Note, the LS detector response is highly non-
linear and differs for alphas, betas, and gammas. Here the bin energies have been 
scaled linearly to align the alpha peak to 5.6 MeV. The two spectra are scaled to 
contain the same integral number of counts in the spectrum. No background 
subtraction has been made, such that low-energy background is present (also seen 
in blank samples). 
 
 
Figure 7. Impurity search: Same experimental Am-241 spectrum from Figure 2 
(black ≈126,000 counts) with the addition of Geant4 simulated impurities of Pu-
240 (25 counts, or 0.02 % of total) and Pu-238 (189 counts, or 0.15 % of total) to 
illustrate detectability in the composite spectrum (red line). No evidence of 
radionuclide impurities was found in the experimental spectrum. 
3.2 Placemat study 
The average and standard deviation of the distribution of the relative activity on the placemats 
vs. foils for the 6 sources was (0.017 ± 0.018) % (Figure 8). The highest value was 0.053 %, 
which is a 5× improvement over the earlier hand-dispensed microdrop method [18]. Based on 
these results, a conservative uncertainty of 0.05 % was assumed due to material loss during the 
quantitative source preparation for the DES measurements.  
 
 
Figure 8. Results of placemat test showing the ratio of (background-subtracted) counts on the 
placemat (P) to that on the foil (F), as measured in two different LS counters. For the low 
background LS counter (orange squares), the statistical uncertainty on the net count rate (P) for 
the placemats was about 0.004 s-1, or 0.002 % of the foil count rate (F). The relative loss P/F 
average and standard deviation of the distribution for the 6 sources was (0.017 ± 0.018) %. The 
highest value was 0.053 %, which is a 5 times improvement over the earlier hand-dispensed 
microdrop method.  
3.3 Massic activity 
The weighted average activity for 4 DES sources was (1.357 ± 0.007) Bq, which combined with 
the dispensed mass from the inkjet, gives a massic activity of 145.7 kBq/g with relative 
combined standard uncertainty uc = 0.72 % (Table 1). The first DES source in the series gave a 
positively biased activity that is explained by a concentrating "first aliquot effect" observed 
previously. We have investigated this effect further in a series of follow-up experiments, but in 
the present work, to avoid uncertainties introduced by any correction, the first sample was simply 
excluded from the massic activity analysis. The major sources of uncertainty were counting 
statistics and the uncertainty in the dispensed mass. The relative counting statistics uncertainty 
(0.49 %) was taken as the uncertainty in the weighted mean count rate for 4 identical Am-241 
samples (same number of drops of active solution), where each individual mean uncertainty was 
the square root of the number of counts in the ROI. For comparison, the “external uncertainty,” 
calculated as the weighted standard deviation for the 4 sources was 0.36 %, indicating that the 
sources were statistically identical. The source mass uncertainty was primarily due to the 
calibration of the mass per drop from the inkjet [14]. 
Table 1. Uncertainty analysis for DES massic activity measurement where 𝑢𝑖 are 
the relative uncertainty in the final massic activity of the solution due to each of 
the input quantities. The ui values are added in quadrature to determine 𝑢c [29]. 
Component 
ui (%) 
Counting statistics 
0.49 
Live time 
0.10 
Background 
0.00 
Pulse assignment 
0.06 
Mass 
0.51 
Limit on material loss 
0.05 
Limit on impurities 
0.05 
uc (%) 
0.72 
 
The standard LS value taken for the massic activity was that of the TDCR system for 5 LS 
sources prepared by pycnometer, with an average massic activity of 144.85 kBq/g and uc = 0.33 
%. All of the LS and DES measurements resulted in consistent massic activities for the solution 
(Figure 9). No change in massic activity was observed during the experiment from evaporation 
or other effects.  
 
Figure 9. Relative difference ∆𝑇𝐷𝐶𝑅 of massic activity from the average of the 
standard method (pycnometer + TDCR). Bars are combined standard uncertainties 
on each measurement method. Left: results plotted in time order of source 
dispensing; no change in massic activity from evaporation or other effects was 
observed over time. Right: results plotted against aliquot mass per sample to 
highlight the good agreement even for very small sample masses achievable by 
DES. 
4. Discussion 
In this work we successfully quantify Am-241 massic activity while spectrally excluding the 
presence of the nearby Pu-240 and Pu-238 isotopes at the 0.02 % to 0.15 % level. Geant4-based 
radiation transport simulation results validate understanding of the DES and predict sensitivity to 
these radioactive impurities. These impurities are invisible to γ-ray spectrometry because they do 
not emit photons and would require chemical processing to detect by traditional alpha 
spectrometry. Further, since Pu-241 and Am-241 are isobars, they can interfere in mass 
spectrometry but are readily resolved by DES (decay energies of 21 keV and 5637 keV, 
respectively). This capability enables primary measurement of activity for multiple radionuclides 
in one assay on drop-dried sources, without the need for chemical processing and the attendant 
chemical tracers. 
Liberation from chemical separations and efficiency tracers brings benefits beyond faster 
throughput and lower cost. In traditional methods, major sources of uncertainty in the massic 
activity measurement include chemical separation and detection efficiency, along with 
ambiguities from spectral interferences from isotopic impurities. For example, recent 
measurements of a Pa-231 solution had a goal of < 0.2 % uncertainty, but the results had 
uncertainty > 3 % due to these issues [30]. If DES were applied to this case, sources would be 
made and counted with 100 % efficiency and spectral resolution would cleanly separate Pa-231 
from an Ac-227 impurity, resulting in predicted uncertainties within the goal. 
5. Conclusion 
The state-of-the-art DES measurements reported here are quantitative in activity and 
spectroscopic, enabling a new capability of multi-nuclide absolute activity. Through inkjet 
gravimetry, DES sources have been prepared with precise and radiometrically validated links to a 
stock solution. This paper thus presents a DES-determined massic activity, validated with 
another primary method and achieving relative combined standard uncertainties that are 
competitive with mature techniques in radionuclide metrology. 
Longer measurements and higher count rates can be employed to reduce statistical uncertainties. 
With a TES optimized for higher heat flow, the activity per source could be increased, resulting 
in lower counting uncertainties. In future quantitative DES work, the energy resolution, which is 
important to the sensitivity to both alpha and beta impurities, may be improved by 4× or more 
based on the highest resolution DES results in the literature [9]. 
Efforts are underway to decrease the uncertainty in sample mass using a new balance being 
developed at NIST. This device incorporates the dispenser into the balance itself and realizes 
mass traceable directly to electrical measurements. For 1 mg masses of gravimetrically diluted 
solution, expected uncertainties are of order 0.1 % [31]. 
6. Acknowledgements 
The authors acknowledge Mark Croce and Katherine Schreiber of Los Alamos National 
Laboratory and Geon-Bo Kim of Laurence Livermore National Laboratory for sharing source 
preparation methods. RF acknowledges the NIST Radiation Physics Building modernization 
team for their support. 
7. References 
[1] 
BIPM, I., IFCC, ILAC, ISO, IUPAC, IUPAP and OIML, International vocabulary of metrology -- Basic 
and general concepts and associated terms (VIM). 2012, JCGM. 
[2] 
Collé, R., Radionuclidic standardization by primary methods: An overview. Journal of 
Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry, 2009. 280(2): p. 265-273. 
[3] 
Irwin, K.D. and G.C. Hilton, Transition Edge Sensors. 2005, Heidelberg: Springer. 
[4] 
Morgan, K.M., Hot science with cool sensors. Physics Today, 2018. 71(8): p. 28-34. 
[5] 
Kim, G.B., et al., Absolute Decay Counting of 146Sm and 147Sm for Early Solar System Chronology. 
Journal of Low Temperature Physics, 2022. 209(5-6): p. 824-831. 
[6] 
Loidl, M., et al., Beta spectrometry with metallic magnetic calorimeters in the framework of the 
European EMPIR project MetroBeta. Applied Radiation and Isotopes, 2019. 153. 
[7] 
Croce, M.P., et al., Development of Holmium-163 Electron-Capture Spectroscopy with Transition-
Edge Sensors. Journal of Low Temperature Physics, 2016. 184(3-4): p. 958-968. 
[8] 
Tollefson, A.D., et al., Measurement of (227)Ac impurity in (225)Ac using decay energy 
spectroscopy. Appl Radiat Isot, 2021. 172: p. 109693. 
[9] 
Koehler, K.E., Low Temperature Microcalorimeters for Decay Energy Spectroscopy. Applied 
Sciences, 2021. 11(9). 
[10] 
Naehle, O.e.a., Publishable Summary for 20FUN04 PrimA-LTD Towards new primary activity  
tandardisation methods based on low-temperature detectors. 2023. 
[11] 
Bé, M.-M.C., V.; Dulieu, C.; Mougeot, X.; Browne, E.; Chechev, V.; Kuzmenko, N.; Kondev, F.; Luca, 
A.; Galán, M.; Arinc, A.; Huang, X., Table of Radionuclides, in BIPM Monographie. 2010: Sévres. 
[12] 
Chechev, V.P. and K.N. Kuzmenko. DDEP Evaluation of Am-241. Atomic and Nuclear data 2010  
[cited 2024; Available from: http://www.lnhb.fr/nuclides/Am-241_tables.pdf. 
[13] 
Muramoto, S. and D. Graham, Deep depth profiling using gas cluster secondary ion mass 
spectrometry: Micrometer topography development and effects on depth resolution. Surf 
Interface Anal, 2021. 53(9): p. 814-823. 
[14] 
Elliott, L.C.C., et al., Sub-picoliter Traceability of Microdroplet Gravimetry and Microscopy. 
Analytical Chemistry, 2022. 94(2): p. 678-686. 
[15] 
Essex, R.M., et al., Isotope dilution mass spectrometry as an independent assessment method for 
mass measurements of milligram quantities of aqueous solution. International Journal of Mass 
Spectrometry, 2023. 483: p. 116969. 
[16] 
Verkouteren, R.M. and J.R. Verkouteren, Inkjet metrology II: resolved effects of ejection 
frequency, fluidic pressure, and droplet number on reproducible drop-on-demand dispensing. 
Langmuir, 2011. 27(15): p. 9644-53. 
[17] 
Sibbens, G. and T. Altzitzoglou, Preparation of radioactive sources for radionuclide metrology. 
Metrologia, 2007. 44(4): p. S71-S78. 
[18] 
Bergeron, D.E., et al., Gravimetric deposition of microliter drops with radiometric confirmation. 
Applied Radiation and Isotopes, 2023. 201: p. 111025. 
[19] 
Jang, Y.S., et al., Development of Decay Energy Spectroscopy for Radionuclide Analysis Using 
Cryogenic 4π Measurements. Journal of Low Temperature Physics, 2012. 167(5-6): p. 967-972. 
[20] 
Hoover, A.S., et al., Measurement of the 240Pu/239Pu mass ratio using a transition-edge-sensor 
microcalorimeter for total decay energy spectroscopy. Anal Chem, 2015. 87(7): p. 3996-4000. 
[21] 
Pomme, S., R. Fitzgerald, and J. Keightley, Uncertainty of nuclear counting. Metrologia, 2015. 
52(3): p. S3-S17. 
[22] 
Baerg, A.P.M., K.;Bowes, G.C., Live-timed anti-coincidence counting with extending dead-time 
circuitry. Metrologia, 1976. 12: p. 77-80. 
[23] 
Bouchard, J., MTR2: a discriminator and dead-time module used in counting systems. Applied 
Radiation and Isotopes, 2000. 52: p. 441-446. 
[24] 
Knoll, G.F., Radiation Detection and Measurement. 2010: Wiley. 
[25] 
Agostinelli, S., et al., Geant4—a simulation toolkit. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics 
Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, 2003. 
506(3): p. 250-303. 
[26] 
Zimmerman, B.E., R. Colle, and J.T. Cessna, Construction and implementation of the NIST triple-
to-double coincidence ratio (TDCR) spectrometer. Appl Radiat Isot, 2004. 60(2-4): p. 433-8. 
[27] 
Pibida, L., et al., Software studies for germanium detectors data analysis. Appl Radiat Isot, 2006. 
64(10-11): p. 1313-8. 
[28] 
Broda, R., P. Cassette, and K. Kossert, Radionuclide metrology using liquid scintillation counting. 
Metrologia, 2007. 44(4): p. S36-S52. 
[29] 
BIPM, et al., Evaluation of measurement data -Guide to the expression of uncertainty in 
measurement. JCGM, 2008. 
[30] 
Essex, R.M., et al., Preparation and calibration of a 231 Pa reference material. Journal of 
radioanalytical and nuclear chemistry, 2019. 322(3): p. 1593-1604. 
[31] 
Schulze, S., et al., Development of a High Precision Electrostatic Force Balance for Measuring 
Quantity of Dispensed Fluid as a New Calibration Standard for the Becquerel. Measurement 
Science and Technology, 2024. 
 
