1 
 
Biohybrid Microrobots Based on Jellyfish Stinging Capsules 
and Janus Particles for In Vitro Deep-Tissue Drug Penetration 
Sinwook Park1, 3, Noga Barak 2, Tamar Lotan2, and Gilad Yossifon1, 3* 
 
1School of Mechanical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 6997801, Israel  
2Marine Biology Department, The Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, 
3103301, Israel  
3Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 6997801, Israel 
* Corresponding author: gyossifon@tauex.tau.ac.il 
 
Abstract 
Microrobots engineered from self-propelling active particles, extend the reach of robotic operations 
to submillimeter dimensions and are becoming increasingly relevant for various tasks, such as 
manipulation of micro/nanoscale cargo, particularly targeted drug delivery. However, achieving deep-
tissue penetration and drug delivery remain a challenge. This work developed a novel biohybrid 
microrobot consisting of jellyfish stinging capsules, which act as natural nanoinjectors for efficient 
penetration and delivery, assembled onto an active Janus particle (JP). While microrobot transport and 
navigation was externally controlled by magnetic field-induced rolling, capsule loading onto the JP 
surface was controlled by electric field. Following precise navigation of the biohybrid microrobots to 
the vicinity of target tissues, the capsules were activated by a specific enzyme introduced to the solution, 
which then triggered tubule ejection and release of the preloaded molecules. Use of such microrobots 
for penetration of and delivery of the preloaded drug/toxin to targeted cancer spheroids and live 
Caenorhabditis elegans was demonstrated in-vitro. The findings offer insights for future development 
of bio-inspired microrobots capable of deep penetration and drug delivery. Future directions may 
involve encapsulation of various drugs within different capsule types for enhanced versatility. This 
study may also inspire in-vivo applications involving deep tissue drug delivery. 
 
Introduction 
Active particles, often referred to as micromotors or microswimmers, self-propel under uniform 
ambient conditions such as magnetic, electric, or chemical fields.[1] When combined with closed-loop 
controlled navigation, they can be regarded as microrobots (MRs), which are gaining recognition as 
precise and controllable tools with numerous potential medical applications, including targeted drug 
delivery, micro-surgery and biomedical diagnosis[2,3]. Despite intensive study on the use of micro-nano-
robots (MNRs) for targeted drug delivery, achieving deep tissue penetration and effective drug delivery 
remain significant challenges. 
2 
 
Previous studies on tissue penetration of MRs predominantly relied on synthetic MRs externally 
powered by a magnetic field or acoustic propulsion[4–13]. Magnetically powered microrobots bring the 
advantages of fuel-free actuation, remote path control and programmability[4–10]. For example, a 
magnetically powered microdriller[9] and a magnetic propeller[8] both with corkscrew-type rotating 
motion, have been used to penetrate gels and the vitreous body of the eye[8]. Wang et al. presented 
acoustic-powered MRs that utilize ultrasound pulses to initiate droplet vaporization of encapsulated 
biocompatible fuel, resulting in high-velocity, bullet-like propulsion of drug-carrying nanoparticles 
preloaded within the MR[11,12]. These MRs have been shown to penetrate hard tissues, e.g. liver. Yet, 
while acoustic-powered MRs exhibit deeper tissue penetration and delivery of nanoparticle payload 
than that of magnetically powered MRs, the penetration depth into a tissue gel matrix was limited to 
~20 μm[12]. 
This study presents a novel drug delivery approach which harnesses jellyfish nematocysts as natural 
nanoinjectors for efficient deep penetration into tissues. Nematocysts, the stinging capsules of jellyfish, 
are inherently explosive, natural-injection systems with significant potential as a drug-delivery 
system[14–17]. They are comprised of a capsule containing a compactly folded, needle-like microtubule 
and a highly concentrated matrix with charged constituents that maintain an extremely high inner 
osmotic pressure of ~150 bar which facilitates tubule firing and penetration into its target[18–20]. The 
permeable, negative charged wall of the jellyfish capsule enables accumulation of molecules within the 
capsule body, particularly those of sizes up to 600 Da[21–24]. During the discharge process, the tubule 
contained within the capsules undergoes an inside-out eversion at an acceleration rate of ~5×106 g and 
extends to over 100-times the capsule’s diameter, enabling it to penetrate into relatively rigid target 
materials[25,26]. Subsequently, molecules preloaded within the capsule are ejected through the tubule's 
generally porous surface, primarily through its tip opening[17]. 
The formation of biohybrid MRs consisting of jellyfish capsules can be achieved through the 
strategic dielectrophoretic pairing (DEP) of synthetic active particles (e.g., Janus particles, JP) with 
intact jellyfish capsules with encapsulated payloads. Such a combination offers devices with synergistic 
behavior of naturally occurring mechanisms with engineered functionalities. For example, biohybrid 
micromotors and microrobots were recently engineered for drug delivery into hard cancer tissues by 
coupling motile microorganisms (e.g., bacteria[27–29], sperm cell[30]) that swim via flagellar motion, with 
drug-loaded synthetic nanoparticles[31]. Our recent investigations utilizing metallo-dielectric JPs 
demonstrated electrically unified control over both self-propulsive motion and DEP-based cargo 
manipulation[32–35]. JPs function as micromotors and cargo carriers, and under the application of an 
electric field, were recently shown to transport antibody-functionalized beads for sandwich 
immunoassay-based biosensing[33], as well as localized electroporation and transfection of drugs/genes 
into cells[36]. This work aimed to assemble biohybrid MRs consisting of synthetic JPs and natural 
jellyfish capsules and to characterize their transport under combined magnetic and electric field 
3 
 
actuations. It also assessed the potential of navigating them to targeted regions within a microfluidic 
chamber and to perform in-vitro injection of the molecular contents of the jellyfish capsules deep into 
targeted cancer spheroids and a C. elegans model. 
 
Results and Discussion  
Assembly of biohybrid microrobots and characterization of their transport  
An innovative strategy was used to develop biohybrid MRs for precise transport and activation of 
jellyfish capsules preloaded with drugs (Fig. 1a). The micromotor, consisting of JPs, exhibits controlled 
self-propulsion and navigation through a magnetic rolling field, along with an external alternating (AC) 
electric field[37]. The micromotors and the jellyfish capsules are assembled by dielectrophoretic (DEP) 
trapping forces under an external AC electric field. Once the biohybrid MRs are formed, magnetic 
rolling is primarily employed to transport them to the targeted region. Activation of the jellyfish 
capsules involves the introduction of an enzyme (1% subtilisin protease) that destabilizes the operculum 
of the capsule, resulting in an osmotic pressure difference, followed by rapid tubule discharge[20]. While 
subtilisin protease was chosen for convenience, other enzymes and compounds such as ethylene glycol 
tetraacetic acid (EGTA), methylene blue, and various salts are also alternatives.[22,38] Fig.1b depicts a 
biohybrid MR formed (Ⅰ) by combining a 27μm JP with ten jellyfish capsules within a PBS (σ ~ 18 mS 
cm-1) solution inside a microchamber. The MR was then transported to the targeted region (II) via 
magnetic field-based rolling, coupled with AC field-based orientation (5 MHz, 15Vpp), and tubules were 
ejected (Ⅲ) upon interaction with the enzyme.  
 
Figure 1. Biohybrid microrobots comprised of Janus particles and jellyfish capsules. (a) Conceptual 
illustration of the biohybrid microrobots (MRs) comprised of jellyfish capsules as cargo on metallo-dielectric 
Janus particle (JP) carriers. The cargo-loaded JPs are transported via magnetic rolling, while an electric field aligns 
4 
 
the JPs and traps the capsules in regions with the activating enzyme, which triggers capsule discharge with rapid 
microtubule ejection in various directions. The metallic coating (Cr/Ni/Au) on the JP is depicted in yellow, while 
the JPs’ bare polystyrene hemisphere is depicted in green. (b) Time-lapse microscopic images depicting (Ⅰ) a 
representative biohybrid MR loaded with more than ten capsules within a PBS solution (σ ~ 18 mS cm-1), (II) the 
transport of biohybrid MRs using magnetic rolling with an applied electric field and (Ⅲ) capsule discharge 
triggered by the enzyme. The image in II was generated by superimposing images taken at two-second intervals. 
The red arrow indicates the direction of propulsion. The magnetic field rotation was 100 rpm, and the applied 
electric field was 10 kHz, with 15Vpp. Scale bar: 50μm. 
 
To optimize the trapping of jellyfish capsules and the transportation of assembled MRs, the 
dynamics of the JPs and their cargo-loading behaviors were investigated under varying electric and 
magnetic fields and solution conductivities (Fig. 2). This included the application of either only electric 
field for singular control of loading and transport or a combination of magnetic rolling and an electric 
field. Prior to capsule trapping, we examined the transport behavior of JPs in different concentrations 
of NaCl solutions from 0.01 to 10 mM NaCl under three conditions: magnetic rolling only, electric field 
only, coupled magnetic rolling and electric field (Fig S1 and movie S2). Under magnetic rolling, the 
velocity of JPs slightly increased with higher NaCl concentrations due to the decreased electric double 
layer (EDL) thickness, which increased the effective friction between the JPs and the bottom substrate. 
When driven by an electric field only, the JP’s self-propulsion exhibited either induced charge 
electrophoretic (ICEP) or self-dielectrophoretic (sDEP) propulsion depending on the applied 
frequency.[32–35] Increasing the frequency of the AC electric field resulted in a transition from ICEP (JP 
moves with its dielectric side forward) to sDEP (JP moves with its metallic-coated side forward) 
propulsion. As the NaCl concentration increased, the velocities of JPs in both ICEP and sDEP modes 
decreased, reaching nearly zero at 10 mM NaCl. Such decrease in the magnitude of the electrokinetic 
velocity with increasing solution conductivity is well known and still not fully understood as it 
necessitates theories that go beyond the linearized electric double layer (EDL) descriptions[39]. In 
particular, as the RC time of the induced EDL is decreasing with increasing solution conductivity (as 
the Debye length scales inversely with the square root of the solution conductivity), the frequencies 
(inversely proportional to the RC time) for transitioning between ICEP and sDEP are also shifted to 
higher values[39]. Combining magnetic rolling with an electric field resulted in the superposition of both 
electric-field driven and magnetic rolling vectors, which adjusted the angles according to the applied 
frequencies. This mode, particularly at higher frequencies (>2 MHz), enhanced the magnetic rolling-
induced velocity and controllability due to the electric-field induced orientation, especially at 
concentrations above 10 mM NaCl, as explained in our previous work[37]. Additionally, the DEP 
responses of jellyfish capsules in varying NaCl concentrations were comprehensively characterized (Fig. 
S2). At NaCl concentrations below 0.1 mM and above 10 mM, the capsules exhibited positive 
dielectrophoresis (pDEP) and negative dielectrophoresis (nDEP) behavior, respectively, across all 
5 
 
frequency ranges. At the intermediate solution concentration of 1 mM, the DEP response shifted from 
nDEP to pDEP at a cross-over frequency between 100 kHz and 500 kHz. Fig. 2a and movie S1 illustrate 
the representative transport and on-the-fly cargo loading of a biohybrid MR propelled by a unified 
external AC electric field (2 kHz, 15 Vpp) in the presence of 0.1 mM NaCl. Under these conditions, the 
JP propelled due to ICEP motion, with its dielectric hemisphere forward, while trapping capsules on its 
equator due to a pDEP response. The maximum number of trapped capsules reached 4 to 5 at the 
dielectric hemisphere's equator, with even more capsules trapped in other locations under solely electric 
field application (e.g., 1 kHz, 0.1 mM NaCl, Fig. S4a) without magnetic rolling. However, in ICEP 
mode, the propulsion direction of multiple JPs appeared random due to the initial orientation of their 
dielectric surfaces. In sDEP mode, JPs tended to be stuck to the bottom surface by electrostatic attraction, 
making transport difficult (Fig. S1). Thus, magnetic rolling or steering was necessary for precise 
transport of assembled microbots in both cases.  
The combination of an electric field and magnetic rolling enabled controllable transport of JPs for 
capsule trapping. Fig. 2c shows representative pDEP and nDEP trapping of the capsules on a single JP 
during the transport at varying NaCl conductivities under the tested conditions with various frequencies.  
Increasing the frequency resulted in a shift between nDEP and pDEP responses of capsules at the 
intermediate solution conductivity of 1 mM NaCl, while keeping pDEP based capsule trapping within 
solution conductivities below 0.1 mM NaCl (Fig. 2c, Fig. S2 and 4). The locations of nDEP and pDEP 
electrostatic traps on the JP surface were obtained from three-dimensional (3D) numerical simulations 
(Fig. S3). Notably, pDEP trapping of capsules at the dielectric hemisphere's equator was observed at 
solution concentrations <1 mM NaCl, while nDEP trapping at their metallic side was observed at 
solution concentrations >1 mM NaCl (Fig. 2c). At solution concentrations below 1 mM NaCl, the 
average number of pDEP-trapped capsules per JP was one or two when combining an electric field (at 
all frequencies) with magnetic rolling, as the capsules were sheared off by magnetic rolling, preventing 
them from either trapping or remaining on the surface of JP (Fig. S4a and b). 
6 
 
 
Figure 2. Electrical trapping of jellyfish capsules on Janus particles and magnetic field-based 
transportation of the assembled biohybrid microbots. (a) Representative transport of a biohybrid microbot 
(MR) carrying jellyfish capsules within 0.1 mM NaCl, subjected to a unified external AC electric field (2 kHz, 15 
Vpp), without magnetic field, to drive self-propulsion and capsule trapping. (b) The MR was subjected to an 
external rotating magnetic field (100 rpm) along with an AC electric field (2 MHz, 15Vpp) for self-propulsion and 
capsule trapping within 10 mM NaCl, respectively. (c) Gallery of the assembled MRs with their transport 
directions at varying conductivities of NaCl and applied electric field frequencies. Two 3D schematic description 
of the possible trapping locations of the capsules onto the MRs under positive dielectrophoresis (pDEP) (navy-
blue color filled rectangles) and negative dielectrophoresis (nDEP) (yellow-orange color filled rectangles) 
trapping conditions. Blue, black and red dashed arrows indicate the transport direction driven by electric fields, 
for induced-charge electro-phoresis (ICEP) (dielectric hemisphere forward), self-dielectrophoresis (sDEP) 
(metallic-coated hemisphere forward) and magnetic rolling with electric field orientation, respectively.  
 
In high-conductivity solutions (10 mM NaCl) or at frequencies exceeding 1 MHz, the JP is 
exclusively propelled through magnetic rolling, as the electric field ceases to contribute to propulsion. 
Instead, the electric field plays a role in orientating the JP, to improve the stability of its rotation along 
the axis perpendicular to its metallo-dielectric interface, and to facilitate the DEP trapping of the 
jellyfish capsules on the JPs surface (see Fig. 2b, Fig S1 and movie S1).Comparing to lower 
concentration below 1mM NaCl, more capsules were trapped onto the JP surface (Fig.S4c), due to the 
decreased electric double layer (EDL) resulting in electrostatic absorption. Following trapping, the 
capsules seemed to remain adsorbed to the JP surface in the absence of AC electric fields. It was also 
7 
 
observed that JPs tend to form clusters due to both magnetic and electrostatic interactions, enhancing 
their capacity to trap capsules (Fig. S4c). The optimal cluster size appears to be three to six JPs, as these 
clusters demonstrate high efficiency in transport (fast velocity) and capturing capsules, with a maximum 
loading capacity of approximately 10 capsules. However, clusters with more than 10 JPs encounter 
transport difficulties due to their large volume, and the number of captured capsules decreases because 
the surface area for trapping becomes blocked. High-conductivity solutions of up to 10mM NaCl were 
tested, yet the range should be extended to close to physiological solution conditions such as 100 mM 
NaCl (data not shown), cell growth medium, 10 mM PBS, seen in fig.1b). These solutions exhibit 
consistent DEP trapping and propulsion behavior similar to that observed with 10 mM NaCl and are 
suitable for biosamples, e.g. cancer spheroids, as they maintain the osmolarity balance[40]. 
 
Transportation and activation of biohybrid MRs 
The transportation and activation of the assembled biohybrid MR was illustrated using a simplified 
microfluidic setup adapted from our previous work[33](see Fig. S5a). A mixture of 27 μm-sized JPs and 
jellyfish capsules was introduced into a microchamber filled with physiological buffer (σ ~15 mS/cm), 
through one of the drilled inlet holes. They were then assembled and transported to the target region 
located ~7 mm away from the inlet, using a combination of rotating magnetic and electric fields. 
Subsequently, 1 % w/v subtilisin was introduced through the other inlet hole to trigger rapid tubule 
ejection and delivery of the preloaded molecular contents of the capsules (Fig. 3).  
Fig. 3a depicts various biohybrid MRs, including single, dual and triple JP configurations, each 
loaded with a different number of intact capsules within 10mM NaCl (see movie S3). An AC electric 
field with frequencies of 100 kHz and 2 MHz was then applied to the first two and the last MR, 
respectively. During magnetic rotation, the capsules assembled on the JPs exhibited minimal 
detachment from the surface. The presence of assembled MRs even before applying the electric field 
as well as the attachment of the capsules onto the entire surface of JPs, including onto the equator of 
the metallic-coated hemisphere, as demonstrated by nDEP trapping, provide additional evidence of non-
specific adsorption of capsules to the JPs. This phenomenon leads to less detachment of capsules by 
magnetic rotation-induced hydrodynamic shearing. At the activation stage, the diffused enzymes 
triggered the inside-out eversion of tubules within most of the capsules in the biohybrid MR. This 
process led to rapid elongation of the tubules, reaching an average length of 298 ± 20 μm. While the 
experimental setup and camera speed were not sufficient for monitoring the speed of tubule ejection, 
previous studies indicated velocities between 10 mm s⁻¹ and 10 m s⁻¹[17,41]. The release mechanism 
depends on the level of enzyme exposure to the capsules. On average, it took approximately 5 minutes 
to activate over 70% of the capsules compared to the total counted before activation in an open chamber. 
However, in the microfluidic chamber (Fig. S6, case A and B), there was an additional delay primarily 
due to the time required for the enzyme to diffuse and reach the specific locations (1 mm distance from 
8 
 
the left-inlet hole) where the biohybrid MRs had been transported (Fig. S6). Due to the uncontrolled 
stochastic direction of tubule ejection, a large number of MRs carrying many jellyfish capsules is 
suggested to be an efficient solution for effective drug delivery. Ejection of toluidine blue and acridine 
orange molecules, preloaded within the capsules was observed (Figs. 3b and c, respectively). Movies 
S4 to S5 and Fig. S5b show the entire MR transportation process and activation. Most molecules were 
ejected through the tubule tip rather than along the tubule, and the capsules were empty after ejection. 
All molecules, except for those adsorbed, were ejected from the capsules once the tubules were fully 
elongated following activation, which occurred after approximately 11 minutes of enzyme exposure 
(Fig S6c). Interestingly, some capsules were disconnected from the JP surface following the discharge 
event, likely due to the rebound-like forces associated with the discharge. These results demonstrate the 
ability to control the transport of assembled biohybrid MRs to specific locations and to activate rapid 
tubule elongation of ~300 μm and subsequent ejection of the capsules’ molecular contents. This 
innovative approach holds promise for delivering drugs deep into organs and tissues. 
 
Figure 3.  Enzyme-triggered tubule elongation of transported jellyfish capsules results in ejection of their 
preloaded molecular content. (a) Different compositions of Janus particles (JPs), comprising single, dual, and 
triple JPs, are transported and exposed to an enzyme-rich environment, which leads to the activation of the intact 
capsules trapped onto the microbots. Insets illustrate schematics of the corresponding microrobot states. (b) Time-
lapse microscopic images showing the ejection process of preloaded toluidine blue O dye from biohybrid 
microbots. Blue arrows indicate the release of molecules from the capsule bodies through tubules. Empty capsule 
bodies are highlighted by red arrows. (c) Fluorescence microscopy images showing ejection of fluorescently-
tagged acridine orange from the tip of the tubule (scale bar: 50 μm). 
 
In vitro deep penetration of biohybrid microbots tubules into cancer spheroids  
To assess the potential used of biohybrid MRs for deep tissue penetration, in-vitro experiments 
using cancer spheroids derived from the 293T cancer cell line, were conducted within a microfluidic 
chamber containing cell culture medium (σ ~18 mS/cm) (Fig. 4). A MR swarm was transported from 
the right chamber holes (Fig. 4b), over a distance of ~8 mm, to 1 mm-diameter spheroids placed near 
the left chamber hole (movie S6). Upon enzymatic activation of the capsules, the ejected tubules deeply 
penetrated and injected their pre-loaded molecular content into the targeted spheroids.  
9 
 
Time-lapse images depicting the ejection of preloaded molecules, including toluidine blue and acridine 
orange, into the spheroids are shown in Figs. 4c and d and are complemented by movies S6 and S7, 
respectively. The initial time (t = 0 s) was arbitrarily set one frame before tubule activation. In the case 
of toluidine blue, the injection of the molecules into the cancer spheroid is seen by the region with lower 
image brightness associated with the ejected molecules, illustrating the successful injection of 
molecules through the tip of the ejected tubule to a depth of ~300 μm from the edge of the spheroid. In 
the case of acridine orange, a clear fluorescent trace was observable along the ejected tubule and within 
the spheroid (Fig. 4d), likely due to its perforated structure[17,42]. To minimize enzyme toxicity[43], its 
concentration was maintained at a maximum of 0.2% w/v. Upon activation, the tubules fully extend, 
completely unfolding from within the capsules. Nonetheless, the cells on the outer surface of the 
spheroid displayed significant swelling and morphological changes upon diffusion of the natural 
jellyfish toxin (e.g., polyclonal antitoxin A2 [44]) from nearby activated capsules that did not penetrate 
the spheroid due to the stochastic direction of tubule ejection. Overall, the percentage of tubules that 
penetrated the spheroid, relative to the total number ejected, was approximately 23% based on multiple 
trials. To increase the chances of effective spheroid penetration, the number of biohybrid MRs 
transported to the targeted spheroid was increased. 
 
Figure 4. Deep penetration of biohybrid microbots tubules into a cancer spheroid. a) A schematic of the deep 
penetration of preloaded molecular content from the capsules of a biohybrid microbot (MR) into cancer cell 
spheroids, achieved through the transport of the biohybrid microbots followed by activation of the loaded capsules 
by a specific enzyme. (b) Microscopy images depicting transport of a swarm of MRs toward a target spheroid 
(direction is indicated by a red arrow) using magnetic rolling with an electric field (15 Vpp, 2 MHz) (scale bar: 
10 
 
100 μm.) (c) Time-lapse microscopy images capturing penetration of the ejected tubule followed by injection of 
the preloaded content (toluidine blue O) deep into the spheroid. The orange arrow indicates tubule elongation 
from the jellyfish’s capsule body and the dashed circle marks the ejected dye. (d) Time-lapse fluorescence 
microscopy images showing tubule penetration into the spheroid (indicated by a yellow arrow) and ejection of 
fluorescently-tagged molecules along the tubule (indicated by a red arrow) (scale bar: 50 μm). 
 
Penetration of biohybrid microbot tubules into living Caenorhabditis elegans 
Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) was employed as a target animal model to investigate the 
penetration capabilities of the biohybrid MRs (Fig. 5). It should be noted that C. elegans serves as an 
excellent animal model for studying the effects of neural toxins due to its simple and well-characterized 
nervous system[45]. Unlike the conventional microinjection method[46,47] involving glass capillaries and 
halocarbon oil-mounted worms on an injection pad, the present setup utilized freely swimming, age-
synchronized C. elegans (~250 μm in length and ~15 μm in diameter). The worms were introduced into 
the left side of a microfluidic chamber filled with worm growth medium. The biohybrid MRs, injected 
through the right hole, propelled toward the swimming C. elegans by magnetic rolling under an electric 
field (15Vpp, 2 MHz). Once they reached the target, an enzyme (0.3% w/v subtilisin) was introduced 
for capsule activation. Of note, mixtures of different types of capsules with different dimensions (i.e., 
small and large capsules [48]) were assembled together onto the JPs.  The assembled MRs, composed of 
JP clusters with several (~10) loaded capsules containing blue dyes, were transported far from the inlets, 
chasing healthy C. elegans and attempting to penetrate the swimming worms. However, they neither 
penetrated the worms nor elicited a significant reaction (Movie S8). To improve penetration, the 
mobility of the worms was decreased through paralysis, by addition of 20 μM levamisole. 
Figures 5b and c, complemented by Supplementary Movie S9, illustrate the sequential events 
focusing on capsule shooting at the worms and their subsequent motion response. It is noted that the C. 
elegans were located near the right chamber hole, where untrapped jellyfish capsules were also 
randomly dispersed. For instance, for worm "1," marked with a yellow dot circle in Fig. 5b and inset in 
Fig. 5b, initial motion nearly ceased before capsule activation. Following activation and penetration of 
the small capsule tubule, the worm transitioned from a U-shape to a snake-coiled configuration within 
2 minutes. This behavior resembles an escape response[49,50], potentially serving to protect its bodies 
from potentially threatening stimuli, such as toxins, and thermal stimuli. Interestingly, upon tubule 
penetration from large capsules, the paralyzed worm exhibited a sudden vigorous motion that lasted for 
~ 4.5 minutes (Fig. 5c and Supplementary Movie S9). In another case of a non-paralyzed worm, 
cessation of movement was observed upon penetration of the tubule of a small capsule (Movie S10d). 
It was noted that the abrupt reactions of C. elegans were not triggered by  other potential stimuli, such 
as the cytotoxicity of the introduced enzyme, the applied external electric field, or magnetic rolling, as 
evidenced by the control tests (movie S10a to c). It is hypothesized that a muscle twitching effect was 
11 
 
responsible for the sharp movements, also known as omega turns[50,51], upon tubule penetration, likely 
triggered by exposure to the natural jellyfish toxins[52] and not necessarily due to the mechanical 
penetration itself of the thin tubule (~1 μm in diameter[24]). Further investigation is needed to gain a 
deeper understanding of post-penetration responses, including potential neurotoxic effects[52].   
 
Figure 5. Biohybrid microbots penetrating living Caenorhabditis elegans (a) A schematic of the penetration 
of tubules of jellyfish capsules in biohybrid microbots into live C. elegans. (b) Time-lapse microscopy images 
capturing the moments before and after capsule activation and the corresponding worm reaction. The yellow-
dotted inset provides a close-up view of the body bending of worm "1" (yellow circle), induced by penetration of 
small capsules (red arrows). (c) Time-lapse microscopy images capturing the penetration of tubules from a large 
capsule into paralyzed C. elegans, resulting in abrupt motion and noticeable body bending. Scale bar: 50 μm. 
 
Conclusions 
This study introduced a novel nematocyst-based biohybrid MR system that enabled drug delivery 
deep into targeted tissues in in-vitro assays. The MRs were assembled through DEP-assisted trapping, 
and transported via magnetic rolling-based propulsion, assisted with electric field-based orientation so 
as to navigate them to a targeted region of interest. After reaching the target destination, capsule 
activation was triggered with a specific enzyme. Deep penetration of the ejected tubule into cancer 
spheroids and living organisms, such as C. elegans, was demonstrated, and highlighted the potential of 
this technology for targeted drug delivery applications. In the case of C. elegans, interesting post-
injection responses, including possible neurotoxic effects on C. elegans muscles, were observed and 
warrant further investigation.  
Future developments of this unique system will include replacement of the toxic contents of the 
capsules with various drugs of therapeutic value, as well as use of different types of capsules to enhance 
versatility and to improve biocompatibility[53]. Future developments may also include realization of 
bioinspired engineered synthetic MRs preloaded with drugs and designed with various triggering and 
12 
 
ejection mechanisms (e.g., osmotic pressure[19]) for their release. The controlled and precise navigation 
of the biohybrid MRs demonstrated here within an in-vitro microfluidic platform, serves as a foundation 
for their further exploration in more complex biological environments, as well in in-vivo applications. 
Although the reduced concentration of subtilisin protease (0.2%) in in-vitro tests resulted in minimal 
cytotoxicity over a few hours[54], future research could explore encapsulating enzymes with effective in 
vivo transport and release strategies[55,56] using various  synthetic and biopolymers - such as protein 
capsids, hydrogels  and lipid-based particles[57] - outside the stinging capsule or developing alternative 
external triggering mechanisms (e.g. acoustic) to induce capsule discharge that are safely for potential 
in-vivo applications, eliminating the need for enzymes. Such precise MRs that move within complex 
biological environments and enable controlled delivery of drugs deep into targeted tissues, hold great 
potential in advancing precise drug delivery for various biomedical applications. While our approach is 
still in its early stages and not yet suitable for in vivo applications, it shows promise for assessing deep 
tissue drug delivery effects in in vitro models, such as organ-on-a-chip systems that incorporate 
organoids, organelles, or dissected tissues. This research provides insights into drug penetration beyond 
the tissue surface [58, 59] and may inspire future studies focused on in vivo deep tissue drug delivery 
applications. 
 
Materials and Methods 
Preparation of Janus particles and experimental setup 
Magneto-metallo-dielectric JPs (27 μm in diameter) were fabricated by coating fluorescent 
polystyrene particles (Sigma Aldrich) with 15nm Cr, followed by deposition of 50 nm Ni and 15 nm 
Au layers using an electron-beam evaporator, as previously described[33]. Before releasing the JPs from 
the glass slides, they were magnetized by placing the slide in between two neodymium magnetic blocks, 
with opposite dipoles aligned parallel to the metallo-dielectric interface of the JP[37]. The JPs were 
released by sonication in deionized (DI) water, and then rinsed three times with DI water before their 
introduction into the final solutions. 
The single microchamber device comprised a circular microfluidic chamber, with a spacer 
positioned between two indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass slides (Delta Technologies), as previously 
described[33]. The bottom ITO-coated glass slide underwent an additional coating with 20 nm-thick 
silicon dioxide using a sputter (AJA international Inc., ATC 2200), to minimize particle adsorption onto 
the substrate. The thin spacer, which formed a 9 mm-diameter microchamber, was made from 100 μm-
thick double-sided tape (3M), cut with an electronic cutting machine (Silhouette Cameo 3, Silhouette 
America Inc.).  
Various alternating current (AC) frequencies with a sinusoidal wave form were applied using a 
function generator (33250A, Agilent) for the dielectrophoretic attractions-based assembly of MRs and 
jellyfish capsules and to promote the magnetic rolling of the assembled MRs. To facilitate transportation 
13 
 
of assembled biohybrid MRs, an external rotating magnetic field was applied via a homebuilt system 
consisting of a fixed neodymium magnet (grade: N35) mounted on a motor for its controlled rotation 
with a corresponding control unit. Transport and activation of biohybrid microrobots were captured 
using an Andor Neo sCMOS camera mounted on an inverted epi-fluorescence microscope (Eclipse Ti-
U, Nikon) or a spinning disc confocal microscopy system (Yokogawa CSU-X1) connected to an 
inverted microscope (Eclipse Ti-U, Nikon) and a camera (Andor iXon3) equipped with a 10×/20× 
objective lens for obtaining bright-field and fluorescence microscopy images, respectively. Motion 
analysis of biohybrid microrobots and quantification of fluorescent cargo intensities after binding events, 
were conducted using ImageJ software. 
Jellyfish capsule preparation and staining 
Jellyfish (isorhiza nematocysts) capsules were isolated from the tentacles of Rhopilema nomadica 
jellyfish[44] collected in Haifa Bay, Israel, as described by Rachamim et al[14]. The tentacles were briefly 
homogenized and separated in a 50% Percoll (GEHealthcare) gradient before being washed with 
distilled deionized water (DDW). Of note, jellyfish capsules of heterogeneous morphologies (i.e., 
different sizes and shapes) were isolated[48]. Capsules were re-suspended in 10 mM NaCl and stored at 
4 °C for one day before the experiments. For molecule ejection experiments, 0.1% toluidine Blue O and 
0.1% acridine orange hemi(zinc chloride) salt were loaded into the capsule after mixing capsules for 5 
min. The stained capsules were then centrifuged at 4 °C, 800 RCF, for 4 min, resuspended in PBS, cell 
culture medium, or worm growth medium, and then introduced together with JPs into one of the 
chamber’s inlets. 
Cancer spheroid preparation 
The 293T cancer cell line was cultured at 37 °C, 5% CO2, in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium 
(DMEM, Biological Industries), supplemented with 10% v/v heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum and 
1% v/v penicillin-streptomycin (Biological Industries). Cells were passaged when reaching 90% 
confluency, typically every 3 days. The conventional hanging drop method was used to generate 3D 
cancer cell spheroids[60] one day before introducing the cells into the microchamber device. The 
resulting cell spheroids were gently introduced into the left side of the chamber, which was filled with 
cell culture medium. 
C. elegans preparation and paralysis 
The N2 Bristol strain of Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) was provided by Prof. Gili Bisker, 
Tel-Aviv University, Israel. The worms were cultured on standard nematode growth medium (NGM) 
plates, which were supplemented with Escherichia coli strain OP50 as a food source, and maintained 
at a temperature of 20 ± 1 °C. To ensure the vitality of the stock culture, the worms were transferred to 
fresh NGM plates every 3-4 days, following a protocol previously described[45,61].  
 
Acknowledgements 
14 
 
G.Y. acknowledges support from the Israel Science Foundation (ISF) (1934/20). We would like to thank 
Dr. Adi Hendler and Prof. Gili Bisker from Tel-Aviv University for their help in the C. elgans study 
and Prof. Limor Broday from Tel-Aviv University for her advice with the C. elgans experiments.  
 
 
 
15 
 
Reference 
[1] 
N. L. Abbott, O. D. Velev, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci. 2016, 21, 1. 
[2] 
C. K. Schmidt, M. Medina-Sánchez, R. J. Edmondson, O. G. Schmidt, Nat. Commun. 2020, 
11, 5618. 
[3] 
F. Soto, J. Wang, R. Ahmed, U. Demirci, Adv. Sci. 2020, 7, 2002203. 
[4] 
H. Zhou, C. C. Mayorga-Martinez, S. Pané, L. Zhang, M. Pumera, Chem. Rev. 2021, 121, 
4999. 
[5] 
D. Walker, B. T. Käsdorf, H. H. Jeong, O. Lieleg, P. Fischer, Sci. Adv. 2015, 1, e1500501. 
[6] 
Z. Lin, X. Fan, M. Sun, C. Gao, Q. He, H. Xie, ACS Nano 2018, 12, 2539. 
[7] 
S. Tottori, L. Zhang, F. Qiu, K. K. Krawczyk, A. Franco-Obregõn, B. J. Nelson, Adv. Mater. 
2012, 24, 811. 
[8] 
Z. Wu, J. Troll, P. Fischer, H.-H. Jeong, Q. Wei, M. Stang, F. Ziemssen, Z. Wang, M. Dong, 
S. Schnichels, T. Qiu, Sci. Adv. 2018, 4, eaat4388. 
[9] 
W. Xi, A. A. Solovev, A. N. Ananth, D. H. Gracias, S. Sanchez, O. G. Schmidt, Nanoscale 
2013, 5, 1294. 
[10] 
J. Park, C. Jin, S. Lee, J. Y. Kim, H. Choi, Adv. Healthc. Mater. 2019, 8, 1900213. 
[11] 
D. Kagan, M. J. Benchimol, J. C. Claussen, E. Chuluun-Erdene, S. Esener, J. Wang, Angew. 
Chemie - Int. Ed. 2012, 51, 7519. 
[12] 
F. Soto, A. Martin, S. Ibsen, M. Vaidyanathan, V. Garcia-Gradilla, Y. Levin, A. Escarpa, S. C. 
Esener, J. Wang, ACS Nano 2016, 10, 1522. 
[13] 
S. Jeon, S. Kim, S. Ha, S. Lee, E. Kim, S. Yeun Kim, S. Hwa Park, J. Ho Jeon, S. Won Kim, 
C. Moon, B. J. Nelson, J. Kim, S.-W. Yu, H. Choi, Sci. Robot. 2019, 4, eaav4317. 
[14] 
T. Rachamim, D. Morgenstern, D. Aharonovich, V. Brekhman, T. Lotan, D. Sher, Mol. Biol. 
Evol. 2015, 32, 740. 
[15] 
A. Beckmann, S. Özbek, Int. J. Dev. Biol. 2012, 56, 577. 
[16] 
P. Tardent, BioEssays 1995, 17, 351. 
[17] 
S. Park, G. Piriatinskiy, D. Zeevi, J. Ben-David, G. Yossifon, U. Shavit, T. Lotan, J. R. Soc. 
Interface 2017, 14, 20160917. 
[18] 
S. Szczepanek, M. Cikala, C. N. David, J Cell Sci 2002, 115, 745. 
[19] 
T. Holstein, P. Tardent, Science (80-. ). 1984, 223, 830. 
[20] 
J. Weber, J. Biol. Chem. 1990, 265, 9664. 
[21] 
J. Weber, M. Klug, P. Tardent, Comp. Biochem. Physiol. -- Part B Biochem. 1987, 88, 855. 
[22] 
E. Shaoul, A. Ayalon, Y. Tal, T. Lotan, PLoS One 2012, 7, e31922. 
[23] 
A. Ayalon, I. Shichor, Y. Tal, T. Lotan, Int. J. Pharm. 2011, 419, 147. 
[24] 
B. Americus, T. Lotan, J. L. Bartholomew, S. D. Atkinson, Int. J. Parasitol. 2020, 50, 763. 
[25] 
T. Nüchter, M. Benoit, U. Engel, S. Özbek, T. W. Holstein, Curr. Biol. 2006, 16, R316. 
16 
 
[26] 
C. Hamlet, W. Strychalski, L. Miller, Fluids 2020, 5, 1. 
[27] 
Z. Hosseinidoust, B. Mostaghaci, O. Yasa, B. W. Park, A. V. Singh, M. Sitti, Adv. Drug Deliv. 
Rev. 2016, 106, 27. 
[28] 
D. Zhong, W. Li, Y. Qi, J. He, M. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2020, 30, 1910395. 
[29] 
T. Gwisai, N. Mirkhani, M. G. Christiansen, T. T. Nguyen, V. Ling, S. Schuerle, Sci. Robot. 
2022, eabo0665. 
[30] 
V. Magdanz, J. Gebauer, P. Sharan, S. Eltoukhy, D. Voigt, J. Simmchen, Adv. Biosyst. 2019, 
3, 1900061. 
[31] 
J. Xing, T. Yin, S. Li, T. Xu, A. Ma, Z. Chen, Y. Luo, Z. Lai, Y. Lv, H. Pan, R. Liang, X. Wu, 
M. Zheng, L. Cai, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008262. 
[32] 
A. M. Boymelgreen, T. Balli, T. Miloh, G. Yossifon, Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 760. 
[33] 
S. Park, G. Yossifon, ACS sensors 2020, 5, 936. 
[34] 
S. Park, L. Finkelman, G. Yossifon, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2021, 588, 611. 
[35] 
X. Huo, Y. Wu, A. Boymelgreen, G. Yossifon, Langmuir 2020, 36, 6963. 
[36] 
Y. Wu, A. Fu, G. Yossifon, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2021, 118, e2106353118. 
[37] 
Y. Wu, S. Yakov, A. Fu, G. Yossifon, Adv. Sci. 2023, 10, 2204931. 
[38] 
M. C. McKay, P. A. Anderson, in Biol. Nematocysts (Eds.: D. A. Hessinger, H. M. Lenhoff), 
Academic Press Inc., 1988, pp. 273–293. 
[39] 
A. Boymelgreen, G. Kunti, P. Garcia-Sanchez, A. Ramos, G. Yossifon, T. Miloh, J. Colloid 
Interface Sci. 2022, 616, 465. 
[40] 
S. S. Ozturk, B. O. Palsson, Biotechnol. Bioeng. 1991, 37, 989. 
[41] 
S. Özbek, P. G. Balasubramanian, T. W. Holstein, Toxicon 2009, 54, 1038. 
[42] 
J. Ben-David, S. D. Atkinson, Y. Pollak, G. Yossifon, U. Shavit, J. L. Bartholomew, T. Lotan, 
Parasites and Vectors 2016, 9, 1. 
[43] 
N. Singh, R. Tapader, S. Chatterjee, A. Pal, A. Pal, Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2022, 220, 852. 
[44] 
A. Lotan, L. Fishman, Y. Loya, E. Zlotkin, Nature 1995, 375, 456. 
[45] 
S. Brenner, Genetics. 1974, 77, 71. 
[46] 
M. Rieckher, N. Tavernarakis, Bio-Protocol 2017, 7, 1. 
[47] 
K. S. Ghanta, T. Ishidate, C. C. Mello, STAR Protoc. 2021, 2, 100748. 
[48] 
S. Park, D. Capelin, G. Piriatinskiy, T. Lotan, G. Yossifon, Electrophoresis 2017, 38, 1996. 
[49] 
J. L. Donnelly, C. M. Clark, A. M. Leifer, J. K. Pirri, M. Haburcak, M. M. Francis, A. D. T. 
Samuel, M. J. Alkema, PLoS Biol. 2013, 11, e1001529. 
[50] 
O. D. Broekmans, J. B. Rodgers, W. S. Ryu, G. J. Stephens, Elife 2016, 5, e17227. 
[51] 
N. A. Croll, Adv. Parasitol. 1975, 13, 71. 
[52] 
J. A. Ruszkiewicz, A. Pinkas, M. R. Miah, R. L. Weitz, M. J. A. Lawes, A. J. Akinyemi, O. M. 
Ijomone, M. Aschner, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2018, 354, 126. 
17 
 
[53] 
Y. Tal, A. Ayalon, A. Sharaev, Z. Kazir, V. Brekhman, T. Lotan, Mar. Drugs 2014, 12, 734. 
[54] 
N. Morinaga, K. Yahiro, G. Matsuura, M. Watanabe, F. Nomura, J. Moss, M. Noda, Infect. 
Immun. 2007, 75, 488. 
[55] 
Q. Li, X. Li, C. Zhao, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2020, 8, 1. 
[56] 
A. Ali Redha, C. Kodikara, D. Cozzolino, Nutrients 2024, 16, 3625. 
[57] 
F. Bialas, D. Reichinger, C. F. W. Becker, Enzyme Microb. Technol. 2021, 150, 109864. 
[58] 
D. Kumar, R. Nadda, R. Repaka, Advances and Challenges in Organ-on-Chip Technology: 
Toward Mimicking Human Physiology and Disease in Vitro, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2024. 
[59] 
E. Lopez-Vince, C. Wilhelm, T. Simon-Yarza, Drug Deliv. Transl. Res. 2024, 14, 2216. 
[60] 
R. Foty, J. Vis. Exp. 2011, 20, 2720. 
[61] 
T. Stiernagle, in WormBook (Ed.: The C. elegans Research Community), WormBook, 2006, 
pp. 1–11. 
 
 
 
18 
 
Supplementary information 
Biohybrid Microrobots Based on Jellyfish Stinging Capsules 
and Janus Particles for In Vitro Deep-Tissue Drug Penetration 
Sinwook Park1, 3, Noga Barak 2, Tamar Lotan2, and Gilad Yossifon1, 3* 
1School of Mechanical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 6997801, Israel  
2Marine Biology Department, The Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, Haifa, 
310330, Israel 
3Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 6997801, Israel 
* Corresponding author: gyossifon@tauex.tau.ac.il 
   
Movie S1:  Two movies show the transport of a biohybrid microbot carrying jellyfish capsules: one 
driven by a unified external AC electric field (2 kHz, 15Vpp) within 0.1 mM NaCl without a magnetic 
field, and the other by a combined external rotating magnetic field (rotation speed with 100 rpm) and 
an AC electric field (2 MHz, 15Vpp) within 10 mM NaCl, corresponding to Figs. 2a and 2b, 
respectively.Movie S2: Self-propulsion behavior of JPs in different concentrations of NaCl solution 
under the application of an electric field with varying frequencies (2 kHz, 10 kHz, 50 kHz, and 2 MHz) 
and magnetic rolling.Movie S3: Combined two movies showing the transport and activation of the 
loaded jellyfish capsules by enzyme triggering, focused on biohybrid microrobots with various 
configuration of JPs corresponding to Fig. 3a. 
Movie S4: Transport and molecule ejection of Toluidine Blue O, (TBO) in 10mM NaCl solution 
corresponding to Fig. 3b.  
Movie S5: Transport and molecule ejection of Acridine Orange in 10mM NaCl solution corresponding 
to Fig. 3c. 
Movie S6: Transport of the microbots towards the target spheroid using magnetic rolling assisted with 
electric field corresponding Fig. 4b and representative event of molecule injection of Toluidine Blue O, 
TBO deep into the spheroid corresponding to Fig. 4c. 
Movie S7: Molecule injection of Acridine Orange hemi(zinc chloride) salt deep into the spheroid from 
the loaded jellyfish capsules of the biohybrid microrobot by enzyme triggering corresponding to Fig. 
4d. 
Movie S8: Transport of biohybrid microbots toward swimming healthy C. elegans and their 
unsuccessful attempts to penetrate capsule tubules into the target worms due to the latter’s fast 
mobility.Movie S9: The penetration of the biohybrid microbots’ tubules from the small and large 
capsule into paralyzed C. elegans by enzyme triggering corresponding to Figs. 5b and c, respectively. 
Movie S10: Combined movies of control tests to observe the reactions of C. elegans under various 
potential stimuli: a) Control test with only enzyme introduction without an external electric field. b) 
Control test introducing both the enzyme and applying an external electric field with magnetic rolling, 
19 
 
using paralyzed worms. c) Control test without the penetration of tubules under conditions of 
electric/magnetic fields and enzyme introduction. d) Test showing the penetration of tubules from the 
small capsule into non-paralyzed C. elegans by enzyme triggering. 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S1. Propulsion behavior of Janus particles in different concentrations of NaCl solution under the 
application of an electric field and magnetic rolling. (a, b, c) Velocity profiles of Janus particle self-propulsion 
under decoupled magnetic rolling and electric field application within NaCl concentrations of 0.01, 0.1, and 1 
mM, respectively. (d, e, f) Absolute velocity magnitudes under three conditions: only magnetic rolling, coupled 
magnetic rolling and electric field, and only electric field, within NaCl concentrations of 0.01, 0.1, and 1 mM, 
respectively. (Refer to representative movie S2 as an example of Janus particle movement.) (g, h, i) Changes in 
the angle (θ) of the direction of motion relative to the direction of only magnetic rolling (set as the horizontal axis) 
when both the electric field at various frequencies and magnetic rolling are coupled. Yellow, green, and red 
rectangles indicate dominance of ICEP, sDEP, and magnetic rolling transport of Janus particles, respectively, 
upon the applied frequency of the electric field. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S2. DEP characterization of the jellyfish capsules under different concentrations of NaCl solution. 
(a) Microscopic images illustrating pDEP and nDEP behaviors of the capsules at NaCl concentrations of 0.01, 0.1, 
and 1 mM, and 10 mM NaCl, under an applied electric field (2 MHz, 10Vpp). (b) Experimental DEP spectra of 
jellyfish capsules in various NaCl concentrations. The orange dashed rectangle highlights distinct DEP behaviors 
of jellyfish capsules at 2 MHz corresponding to part (a).  
 
 
 
22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S3. 3D simulation of the electric field norm and its gradient onto the 27μm metallo-dielectric Janus 
particles. (a, c) electric field norm (b, d) its gradient on the dielectric and metallic surfaces, respectively.  
 
 
23 
 
 
 
 
Figure S4.  Transport behavior of assembled biohybrid microrobots under varying frequencies of the 
applied external electric field and different NaCl concentrations using 27μm metallo-dielectric JPs. (a) 
Comparison of the propulsion and cargo loading capacity using pDEP trapping of capsules between only electric 
field application with ICEP propulsion mode and a combination of magnetic rolling and electric field application 
with sDEP propulsion mode wtihin 0.1 mM NaCl. (b) Comparison of pDEP and nDEP capsule trapping under the 
applied electric field frequencies of 2kHz and 2 MHz, respectively, within 1 mM NaCl. (c) Comparison of 
individual JPs and clusters of JPs based assembly with capsules within 10mM NaCl. 
 
 
 
24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S5.  Molecule ejections from biohybrid microrobots by enzyme triggering of the jellyfish capsules. 
(a) Schematics of the molecule ejection procedure, illustrating (i) the transportation of assembled biohybrid 
microbots to the left side of the microchamber, and (ii) activation of the loaded capsules by introducing enzyme. 
(b) Microscopic images depicting biohybrid microbots before and after activation. Yellow dot circles with 
numbers indicate the marked jellyfish capsules before and after activation, highlighting the release of preloaded 
Toluidine Blue O molecules from the capsule through their released tubules. 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
Figure S6. Time evolution of molecule-preloaded capsule activation and ejection. (a) Representative time-lapse 
microscopic images showing the first tubule activation (t = 68 s and 38 s) after enzyme introduction (t = 0 s) and 
3 minutes after first activation (t = 247 s and 218 s) for biohybrid MRs with toluidine blue O (TBO)-preloaded 
capsules (A, blue dashed line) and TBO-preloaded capsules alone (C, black dashed line), respectively. (b) 
Corresponding time-evolution graph illustrating the percentage of activated capsules with ejected tubules relative 
to the total capsules counted before activation across four conditions: A, B – transport of TBO-preloaded biohybrid 
MRs within a microfluidic chamber (~1 mm from the left inlet); C – TBO-preloaded capsules alone in an open 
chamber; D – intact capsules (without encapsulated molecules) in an open chamber. (c) Representative time-lapse 
microscopic images showing capsule activation from biohybrid MRs preloaded with the fluorescent molecule 
acridine orange hemi(zinc chloride) salt after sufficient enzyme exposure (11 minutes) within a microfluidic 
chamber. 
 
 
 
26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S7. Percentage of tubule penetration into a cancer spheroid by activated capsules. Red dashed circles 
indicate successful penetration, while blue dashed circles highlight unsuccessful attempts. The spheroid volumes 
are 0.006, 0.007, and 0.01 mm³ (left to right). 
 
