Deep-ER: Deep Learning ECCENTRIC
Reconstruction for fast high-resolution
neurometabolic imaging
Paul Weiser1,2,3, Georg Langs3, Wolfgang Bogner4, Stanislav Motyka3,
Bernhard Strasser4, Polina Golland5, Nalini Singh5, Jorg Dietrich6,
Erik Uhlmann7, Tracy Batchelor8, Daniel Cahill9, Malte Hoffmann1,2,
Antoine Klauser10,11, and Ovidiu C. Andronesi1,2,*
1Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
2Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
3Computational Imaging Research Lab - Department of Biomedical
Imaging and Image-guided Therapy, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria
4High Field MR Center - Department of Biomedical Imaging and
Image-Guided Therapy, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria
5Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, MIT, Cambridge,
MA, USA
6Pappas Center for Neuro-Oncology, Department of Neurology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
7Department of Neurology, Beth-Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Boston, MA, USA
8Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston,
MA, USA
9Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA
10Advanced Clinical Imaging Technology, Siemens Healthineers
International AG, Lausanne, Switzerland
11Center for Biomedical Imaging (CIBM), Geneva, Switzerland
September 30, 2024
1
arXiv:2409.18303v1  [eess.IV]  26 Sep 2024
Abstract
Introduction. Altered neurometabolism is an important pathologi-
cal mechanism in many neurological diseases and brain cancer, which
can be mapped non-invasively by Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopic
Imaging (MRSI). Advanced MRSI using non-cartesian compressed-
sense acquisition enables fast high-resolution metabolic imaging but
has lengthy reconstruction times that limits throughput and needs ex-
pert user interaction.
Here, we present a robust and efficient Deep
Learning reconstruction embedded in a physical model within an end-
to-end automated processing pipeline to obtain high-quality metabolic
maps.
Methods. Fast high-resolution whole-brain metabolic imaging was
performed at 3.4 mm3 isotropic resolution with acquisition times be-
tween 4:11-9:21 min:s using ECCENTRIC pulse sequence on a 7T
MRI scanner. Data were acquired in a high-resolution phantom and
27 human participants, including 22 healthy volunteers and 5 glioma
patients. A deep neural network using recurring interlaced convolu-
tional layers with joint dual-space feature representation was devel-
oped for deep learning ECCENTRIC reconstruction (Deep-ER). 21
subjects were used for training and 6 subjects for testing. Deep-ER
performance was compared to conventional iterative Total Generalized
Variation reconstruction using image and spectral quality metrics.
Results. Deep-ER demonstrated 600-fold faster reconstruction than
conventional methods, providing improved spatial-spectral quality and
metabolite quantification with 12%-45% (P¡0.05) higher signal-to-noise
and 8%-50% (P¡0.05) smaller Cramer-Rao lower bounds. Metabolic
images clearly visualize glioma tumor heterogeneity and boundary.
Deep-ER generalizes reliably to unseen data.
Conclusion.
Deep-ER provides efficient and robust reconstruction
for sparse-sampled MRSI. The accelerated acquisition-reconstruction
MRSI is compatible with high-throughput imaging workflow. It is ex-
pected that such improved performance will facilitate basic and clinical
MRSI applications for neuroscience and precision medicine.
Abbreviations: MRSI = Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopic Imaging, EC-
CENTRIC = ECcentric Circle ENcoding TRajectorIes for Compressed sens-
ing, Deep-ER = Deep learning Eccentric Reconstruction, TGV = Total Gen-
eral Variation, TGV-ER = TGV Eccentric Reconstruction.
Keywords: MR Spectroscopic Imaging, Compressed Sensing, Non-Cartesian,
Deep Learning, Image Reconstruction, Ultra High Field, Brain, Glioma,
Metabolism.
2
1
Introduction
Magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (MRSI) is unique in its ability to
non-invasively probe a detailed profile of brain metabolism [1], [2]. Hence, it
is a highly valuable imaging modality employed in fundamental neuroscience
[3] and clinical neurology [4].
In particular, whole-brain MRSI at ultra-high-field provides comprehen-
sive in-vivo assessment of more than ten neurometabolites simultaneously
with high-resolution spatial mapping.
However, its potential is not fully
realized due to limitations in technical performance. Such MRSI data are
essentially 4D (or more), encoding 3 spatial dimensions and 1 (or more)
spectral dimensions. The need to encode the spectral dimension with high
temporal rate (>1kHz) and the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of metabo-
lites impose demanding requirements on the MRSI acquisition compared to
other MRI modalities. As a result, the acquisition of high spatial resolu-
tion MRSI requires acceleration techniques for scan times that are clinically
feasible.
Substantial acceleration can be achieved by combining spectral-spatial
encoding (SSE) with undersampling techniques [5], [6]. While non-Cartesian
undersampled SSE schemes reduce the acquisition time of high-resolution
(≈3 mm isotropic) whole-brain MRSI from hours to less than 10 minutes
[7]–[9], the reconstruction times for such rapidly acquired data are often
prohibitive (hours) with classical algorithms. This represents a significant
obstacle to the adoption of fast high-resolution MRSI for human imaging in
research and clinical applications.
Although deep learning (DL) methods enable near-instant reconstruction
of structural compressed-sensing MRI [10], [11], for high-resolution MRSI
the spectral-spatial data size and the feature-parameter space that have
to be explored pose great challenges to deep learning reconstruction with
today’s computational hardware. Furthermore, due to the low SNR of the
metabolite signal, exceptional fidelity of the DL reconstruction is required
along the spectral dimension to avoid noise amplification and spurious peaks
for accurate metabolite quantification. Considering that SNR of MRSI is
3-5 orders of magnitude lower than MRI, stability that may be appropriate
for MRI reconstructions is not sufficient for MRSI.
Due to these challenges, only few DL MRSI reconstructions have been
shown to date [12]–[14], with implementations that may limit their general-
ization and practical applicability to: 1) Cartesian k-space data, 2) pipelines
with multiple neural networks to reconstruct different regions of the k-space,
3) single-slice MRSI, and 4) use of spectral dimension that makes the recon-
struction dependent on the nucleus, pulse sequence and B0 field.
In the present work, we addressed these limitations and extended DL
MRSI reconstruction to non-Cartesian undersampled SSE acquisitions, such
as the ECCENTRIC pulse sequence [7].
3
ECCENTRIC acquires randomized circular k-space trajectories, simul-
taneously accelerating two spatial dimensions and providing optimal SNR
for high spatial resolution at ultra-high field. ECCENTRIC acquisition re-
sults in a 4D matrix size of 64×64×31×451 complex-valued data points for
each receive channel, requiring 13.7 GB of memory. Considering that DL re-
quires holding a computational graph with intermediate tensors to compute
gradients via backpropagation [15]–[17], processing the full MRSI acquisi-
tion in one-shot exceeds the capability of the GPU hardware most research
laboratories have access to.
Due to the challenges of k-space undersampling and k-space point hold-
ing information about every spatial voxel, we adopted a strategy aligning
MRSI reconstruction with dynamic 4D MRI [18]. Specifically, we recon-
structed each k-space volume independently along the MRSI time dimen-
sion, reducing the input data size to 31 MB.
The reconstruction of individual timepoints brings several benefits. 1)
It enables us to use the water signal as training data, which can be ac-
quired substantially faster by omitting water suppression in the MRSI pulse
sequence and shortening the repetition time. 2) Reconstruction of water
MRSI can be validated directly against high-resolution structural MRI. This
is an advantage compared to validation using metabolic maps that have less
clear structural features due to lower SNR, which can confound the infor-
mativity of quality metrics. 3) Because each time point is reconstructed
separately, the reconstruction is independent of pulse sequence characteris-
tics such as the echo time, repetition time, B0 field, and nucleus. Hence, the
reconstruction has the potential to generalize naturally to varied acquisition
parameters and data.
Processing MRSI as dynamic time-series MRI requires reconstructing
3-dimensional image volumes along the time dimension with high fidelity
despite the substantially varying contrast and SNR. Advances in DL have
lead to an array of neural-network approaches, most often focusing on the
reconstruction of structural MRI [19]–[32]. While the majority of these ap-
proaches operate either solely in image space or k-space, a recent class of
methods demonstrated improved performance by jointly extracting features
from both spaces [30], [33]–[37]. A promising example of these methods,
Interlacer [37], achieves dual-space feature extraction with recurring lay-
ers that separately learn convolutional filters in each space, subsequent to
a mixing operation that adds features from each space to the other after
taking the appropriate Fourier transform. This strategy proved to outper-
form state-of-the-art networks across a variety of tasks, most importantly
reconstruction of undersampled 2D multi-channel MRI.
The reconstruction network was integrated in an efficient end-to-end pro-
cessing pipeline for whole-brain 1H-MRSI and was evaluated on phantoms,
healthy human volunteers and glioma patients.
4
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Human Subjects:
27 subjects were scanned at the Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomed-
ical Imaging with informed consent (Protocol 2013P001195), including 22
healthy volunteers (12M/10F, 21-49 years) and 5 patients with glioma tu-
mors (demographics and 2021 WHO histo-molecular diagnosis [38] are listed
in Table 1).
Patient
Age/
Histological Diagnosis
Molecular Diagnosis
#
Gender
Grade
Type
IDH1 status
1p/19q codel
Other
1
34/F
3
Astrocytoma
mutant
not-deleted
2
25/M
3
Astrocytoma
mutant
not-deleted
ATRX, TP53
3
66/F
3
Oligodendroglioma
mutant
co-deleted
TP53
4
58/M
2
Astrocytoma
mutant
not-deleted
5
35/M
4
Glioblastoma
wild-type
not-deleted
C7+/C10-, MGMT-, EGFRvIII
TABLE 1: The demographics of glioma patients along with their histo-
logical and molecular diagnoses according to the 2021 World Health Or-
ganization guidelines: IDH1= isocitrate dehydrogenase 1, 1p/19q codel=
codeletion of the short arm of chromosome 1 and the long arm of chro-
mosome 19, ATRX= α-thalassemia mental retardation X-linked, MGMT=
O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase, TP53= tumor protein p53,
C7+/C10-= gain of chromosome 7 and loss of chromosome 10, CDK4=
Cyclin-dependent kinase 4, EGFRvIII= Epidermal growth factor variant
III.
2.2
MRSI Acquisition:
Whole-brain 1H-FID-MRSI was acquired with the 3D-ECCENTRIC (Fig.
1, top) pulse sequence [7] on a 7T scanner (MAGNETOM Terra, Siemens
Healthcare, Germany) equipped with a 32Rx/1Tx head coil (NovaMedical,
USA) using: 0.9 ms echo-time, 27° excitation flip-angle, 275 ms repetition-
time, field-of-view 220x220x105 mm3, matrix size 64x64x31, 3.4x3.4x3.4
mm3 voxel size. The ECCENTRIC circle radius was set to kmax/8 with
spectral bandwidth of 2326 Hz without temporal interleaving. The acquisi-
tion was further accelerated (AF=2-4) by random undersampling ECCEN-
TRIC, resulting in acquisition times between 4:11-9:21 min. Low-resolution
water calibration data was acquired for determination of coil sensitivity pro-
files and B0 field estimation with the same sequence but a smaller matrix
size (22x22x11) and rosette trajectory in 1:16 minutes. For training, fully
sampled water un-suppressed MRSI data were acquired with the same 3D-
ECCENTRIC 1H-FID-MRSI sequence, but shorter TR=100ms in 6:46 min-
utes.
5
2.3
Deep Learning MRSI Reconstruction
Reconstruction of multi-channel proton MRSI (1H-MRSI) requires multi-
ple, sophisticated steps to extract metabolite signals from the overwhelming
background of water and lipid signals in the presence of the inhomogeneous
B0 field and produce metabolic maps. We addressed this challenge by imple-
menting an efficient end-to-end 1H-MRSI processing pipeline that integrates
physics-based modeling and data-driven machine learning as shown in Fig-
ure 1, including the following specific steps: 1) single channel initialization
2) coil combination, 3) B0 correction, 4) water and lipid removal, 5) image
reconstruction, 6) low-rank decomposition, and 7) spectral fitting. The main
novelty of the presented pipeline lies in the design of deep neural networks
for the removal of nuisance signals (step 4) and image reconstruction (step
5), which is the main topic of this paper. The deep learning reconstruction
is described in the following, while details of the other steps are provided in
the Supplementary Material.
In this work, we built on and extended the fully convolutional joint-
domain Interlacer [37] architecture for effective domain transfer to MRSI
reconstruction. First, we extended Interlacer to support our specific data
requirements by applying image- and k-space convolutions in 3D. We in-
creased the receptive field in the image-space domain using a series of con-
volutional blocks and performed coil combination with ESPIRiT [39] coil
sensitivity maps in each Interlacer layer. Second, we extended the model
to non-Cartesian acquisitions via inclusion of an initial gridding layer that
samples the non-Cartesian k-space input onto a grid using iNUFT [40] fol-
lowed by FFT. Third, we embedded the network and end-to-end optimized
it in conjunction with a full MRSI reconstruction pipeline.
The convolutional network (Fig. 1, bottom) takes as input to the first
layer the coil-combined undersampled image data (x1) and gridded multi-
channel undersampled k-space (k1) to predict fully sampled k-space on a
Cartesian grid, which is subsequently transformed to image space, where
the loss is computed. In a series of nL = 10 recurrent Interlacer-type layers
fi (i ∈{1, 2, ..., nL}) [37], the input (xi, ki) to each layer is added back to its
output fi(xi, ki) = ( ˜xi, ˜ki), removing undersampling artifacts by applying
incremental corrections to obtain the fully sampled image xFS,
ki+1 = ˜ki + ki
(1)
xi+1 = ˜xi + xi
(2)
Each Interlacer layer separately applies convolutional blocks in k-space
and image-space. Before each block, image- and k-space features are merged
via weighted addition with learnable mixing parameters {αi, βi},
6
Figure 1:
Deep-learning ECCENTRIC reconstruction (Deep-ER), fully
compatible with non-Cartesian compressed-sensing MRSI acquisition over
the whole brain. Top: ECCENTRIC pulse sequence with ultra-short TE ex-
citation and gradient waveforms for eccentric circles, showing full sampling
(AF=1) and twice accelerated compressed-sense undersampling (AF=2), as
well as the 3D spherical stack of phase-encoded partitions. Middle: Process-
ing pipeline diagram. Bottom: Deep-learning image reconstruction using 10
fully convolutional Interlacer layers. Each layer processes image and k-space
features in parallel, mixing them back together by a learned linear combina-
tion after taking the appropriate Fourier transform. The output of each layer
is added back to the input. The network reconstructs each 3D time-point of
MRSI data separately to maintain independence of the specific acquisition
parameters of the MRSI sequence.
kmix
i
= αiF(C−1(xi)) + (1 −αi) ki
(3)
xmix
i
= βixi + (1 −βi) F−1(C(ki))
(4)
where F represents the FFT operation and C the channel-wise coil combi-
nation of individual coil images by voxel-wise multiplication with ESPIRiT
7
profiles [39].
A single block with 64 filters is applied in k-space, whereas three blocks
with 2-64-2 features, respectively, are applied in image space. The convo-
lutional blocks each apply 3×3×3 kernels followed by BatchNorm [41], as
well as ReLU activation in image space and 3-piece activation [37] in k-
space. Complex values are processed as concatenated real and imaginary
channels [42]. A final convolutional layer is applied at the end to obtain the
desired 64 real and imaginary k-space channels.
The ground truth image xGT was generated for training purposes from
fully sampled k-space data kFS, utilizing the conventional reconstruction
method presented in [7], which is based on an iterative optimization that em-
ploys Total-Generalized-Variation (TGV) [43] as a regularizer. Additional
details are provided in the TGV-ER subsection of the Methods.
During training, the weights θ of the neural network f(·|θ) are optimized
subject to
θ = arg min
θ
EkF S∼K
h
L
 f(UkFS|θ), xGT
i
(5)
where L is a loss function measuring the error of the network prediction from
the ground-truth image, U is the undersampling operator that derives kUS
from kFS, and K represents the distribution of fully sampled ECCENTRIC
k-space training data.
The loss function L combines mean-squared-error
(MSE) and structural-similarity-index (SSIM) terms,
L
 f(kUS), xGT

= MSE
 f(kUS), xGT

+ (1 −SSIM
 f(kUS), xGT )

(6)
in order to minimize outliers and maximize visually perceptible structural
information between the network output f(kUS) and the ground truth image
xGT . In the following, the trained image reconstruction network is referred
to as Deep-ER (Deep learning Eccentric Reconstruction).
2.4
Deep-ER training details
Water MRSI data from 21 subjects were used for training and validation,
with 6 additional subjects used for testing. The training data were aug-
mented by adding a random global phase and random rotation (±0.3 rad),
translation (±20 mm), and scaling (±20%) transformations in image space [44].
During training, non-Cartesian k-space data was randomly undersam-
pled to achieve accelerations AF ∈[1, 6]. Two types of k-space trajectories
are acquired by ECCENTRIC: circles that pass through the center of their
kz partition and circles that do not. Retrospective undersampling exclu-
sively omitted the latter, which is in-line with ECCENTRIC undersampling
during the acquisition. Data were normalized into the interval [0, 1] in im-
age space by dividing the undersampled input and TGV-ER-reconstructed
8
ground truth data by the maximum absolute value of the input. Optimiza-
tion used Adam [45] with a learning rate of 10−5 for 500 epochs over the
training set. The network was trained on a Dell PowerEdge R7525 server
with 64 CPU cores (AMD EPYC 7542 2.90GHz, 128M Cache, DDR4-3200),
512 GB CPU RAM (RDIMM, 3200MT/s), 3 NVIDIA Ampere A40 GPUs
(PCIe, 48GB RAM) running Rocky Linux release 8.8 (Green Obsidian) us-
ing PyTorch 2.2.1 and CUDA 12.1 packages in Python 3.8.
2.5
Statistical Analysis:
Paired one-tail T-Test was used to check statistical significant (P<0.05)
improvement in a voxel-wise comparison of metabolic image maps obtained
by Deep-ER relative to TGV-ER reconstruction. P-values were adjusted for
multiple comparison by Bonferroni correction.
3
Results
To evaluate the performance of the newly developed deep learning Deep-ER
reconstruction pipeline we compared its results to the conventional TGV-ER
reconstruction pipeline that was previously demonstrated [7]. For a more
compact notation in Figures and Tables we indicated the results obtained
by Deep-ER as Deep and results obtained by TGV-ER as TGV.
TGV
(hh:min.)
Deep
(hh:min.)
Image
Reconstruction
09:50
00:01
Pipeline w/o
Spectral fitting
11:23
00:28
Pipeline w
Spectral fitting
13:06
02:11
TABLE 2: Processing times for TGV-ER and Deep-ER pipelines. ’Image
Reconstruction’ includes only the time taken by this pipeline’s step. The
second time includes reconstruction and all the prior steps, while the last line
provides the total time that includes also the spectral fitting by LCModel [46]
after the reconstruction. The TGV-ER performs lipid suppression, Fourier
transform and B0 correction during the iterative reconstruction.
In Table 2 the computational efficiency of the Deep-ER and TGV-ER
reconstructions are compared. The image reconstruction step of the 4D (k,t)
ECCENTRIC data by the Interlaced network [37] is performed in 1 minute,
9
which is approximately
600 times (590) faster than conventional recon-
struction.
The total processing times which include all processing steps,
with and without spectral fitting, are provided for each MRSI pipeline. Ad-
ditional speed-up is possible for Deep-ER pipeline due to faster water and
lipid removal by the WALINET [47] deep neural network. Hence, in the case
of Deep-ER pipeline the largest contribution to the processing time comes
from the last step of spectral fitting.
The performance of the Interlacer reconstruction (Deep) was first evalu-
ated on the water MRSI test data acquired in human participants. For this,
the water suppression was turned off during ECCENTRIC acquisition while
in the processing pipeline the water-lipid removal and spectral fitting steps
were omitted. Hence, the quality of the water MRSI data is determined
only by the performance of the image reconstruction step. As can be seen
by visual inspection of Figure 2, the water images obtained by Interlacer
reconstruction agree well with the ground-truth T1 weighted MRI, showing
improved image quality compared to TGV and iNUFT reconstructions. In
particular, iNUFT exhibits visible undersampling ringing artifacts for accel-
eration factors higher than 2. The NRMSE (normalized root mean square
error) and SSIM (structure similarity index) show less error and more struc-
tural similarity for the Interlacer compared to TGV and iNUFT. While the
images above show improvements for the first time point of the FID (free in-
duction decay), the time series FIDs at the bottom indicate that across time
dimension the Interlacer provides more stable reconstruction with increasing
acceleration. There is higher variability between the FIDs of different accel-
erations for iNUFT and TGV. At higher accelerations (A.F.≥4), there is
increased jittering of the FID for iNUFT and TGV reconstructions. Larger
FID variability and jittering results in noisier spectra and metabolic maps
as can be seen in Supplementary Figure 1.
The MRSI pipeline was evaluated next on the high resolution struc-
tural metabolic phantom shown in Figure 3. The Deep-ER pipeline pro-
vides higher quality metabolic images compared to TGV-ER, visualizing
well structural features up to 4 mm resolution, which can be resolved by
the 3.4 mm resolution of ECCENTRIC acquisition. The correlation coeffi-
cients (CC) between the metabolic maps obtained by the two methods show
that overall there is a good agreement between the newly proposed DL re-
construction and the conventional established reconstruction. In the case of
TGV-ER the 4 mm diameter tubes are blurred and less resolved compared to
Deep-ER. The overlaid spectra at the bottom show that Deep-ER provides
a more stable spectral reconstruction across accelerations, while TGV-ER
shows more spectral variability. Combined these results demonstrate that
the network trained only on human brain data sets, generalizes well to very
different unseen data sets such as the structural metabolic phantom.
In-vivo metabolic images reconstructed from two-fold accelerated (A.F.=2)
ECCENTRIC data acquired in a glioma patient and a healthy volunteer are
10
Figure 2: Comparison of reconstruction methods for water images acquired
with ECCENTRIC in human brain for accelerations 1 to 6. The top im-
ages present the data reconstructed only with the inverse non-uniform FFT
(iNUFT). The center images show the reconstruction performed by conven-
tional compressed sense reconstruction (TGV) and the bottom slices show
reconstruction by Interlacer (Deep). The images reconstructed for the first
FID time point of ECCENTRIC are shown for each reconstruction method.
The corresponding ground truth T1-weighted image is shown to the left.
Two different slices are presented for each reconstruction method. NRMSE
and SSIM were computed for each acceleration between the T1-weighted
image and the ECCENTRIC reconstructions. At the bottom examples of
FIDs time-series overlaid for all accelerations are shown for all three meth-
ods.
shown in Figure 4. Metabolic maps in the patient show well defined bound-
aries for the tumor and metabolic heterogeneity within the tumor. There
is higher contrast between the tumor and the normal brain in the maps
11
Figure 3: Phantom metabolic images of Creatine reconstructed by Deep-
ER and TGV-ER for accelerations from 1 to 5.
Correlation coefficients
(CC) indicate the agreement between Creatine images reconstructed by the
2 methods.
Representative spectra from voxels indicated by arrows are
presented at the bottom. Spectra for all accelerations are shown overlaid
for each method from the tubes of 10mm (I), 8mm (II), 6mm (III) and 4mm
(IV) diameter. The 2mm tubes are not individually resolved by the 3.4mm
ECCENTRIC resolution.
produced by Deep-ER compared to TGV-ER. In the healthy volunteer sim-
ilar gray-white matter structural features are visible in the metabolic maps
obtained by both Deep-ER and TGV-ER reconstructions. The qualitative
parametric maps clearly indicate higher SNR and lower CRLB values for the
Deep-ER compared to TGV-ER reconstruction. Examples of spectra show a
very distinctive pattern between tumor and healthy metabolic profiles, with
a better spectral fit in the case of Deep-ER than TGV-ER spectra. In addi-
tion, Supplementary Figure 1 shows metabolic maps obtained for all accel-
erations (A.F.=1-5) with Deep-ER, TGV-ER and iNUFT reconstructions.
For the fully sample data (A.F.=1) the Deep-ER metabolic maps show the
sharpest anatomical features compared to TGV-ER and iNUFT maps. As
the acceleration increases it can be seen that the metabolic maps obtained by
iNUFT reconstruction become gradually noisier, while the metabolic maps
of TGV-ER reconstruction exhibit increasing blurring of structural details.
In the same time, the accelerated Deep-ER metabolic maps preserve sharper
12
Figure 4: Metabolic images in a glioma patient (top, Patient #1 in Ta-
ble 1) and a healthy volunteer (bottom). The deep learning Deep-ER re-
construction (left) is compared to the conventional TGV-ER reconstruc-
tion (right) showing metabolic maps (NAA, Choline, Creatine, Glutamate
and Glutamine), maps of SNR and Cramer-Rao Lower Bounds (NAA and
Choline). Example of spectra from individual voxels indicated by red ar-
rows on the anatomical images are shown at the bottom (white trace shows
measured spectrum, red trace shows LCModel fit).
structural features compared to TGV-ER maps and have less noise ampli-
fication compared to iNUFT maps. Examples of the spectra show artifacts
that overlap metabolite peaks for iNUFT reconstruction of accelerated data,
indicative of undersampling aliasing artifacts.
Quantitative analysis from all test subjects is presented in Figure 5. The
Bland-Altman plots show a very small bias between Deep-ER and TGV-ER
metabolic maps. The bias increases slightly from the lowest (A.F.=1) accel-
eration (0.6%-2%) to the highest (A.F.=5) acceleration (3%-7%). A similar
trend is noticed for the confidence interval, showing that limits of agreement
increases from [-59%, +55%] for A.F.=1 to [-96%, +82%] for A.F.=5. Box-
plots indicate Deep-ER has higher SNR (12%-45% more) than TGV-ER,
which is statistically significant (P<0.05) for reconstructions up to A.F.=4.
In addition, Deep-ER has lower CRLB (8%-50% less) than TGV-ER that is
statistically significant for A.F.=2. Spectral linewidth with a mean value of
0.04-0.05 ppm is obtained for both reconstructions. Supplementary Figure
13
2 shows the change in correlation coefficient, normalized root mean square
error and structure-similarity index across accelerations. These metrics indi-
cate that as the acceleration increases the difference between Deep-ER than
TGV-ER slightly increases (NRMSE from 8% to 12%, SSIM from 0.9 to 0.82,
CC from 0.97 to 0.93), however all metrics are well above the thresholds for
high agreement and high quality reconstruction.
Figure 5: Quantitative comparison of metabolic maps across acceleration
factors.
Left: Bland-Altman plots are computed for acceleration 2 to 5
for the reconstructed metabolic maps (NAA+NAAG, Cr+PCr, GPC+PCh,
Glu+Gln and Ins+Gly). Right: Boxplots of FWHM, SNR and CRLB of
total NAA, Choline and Creatine as computed by LCModel. Each plot com-
pares the deep learning based approach Deep-ER to conventional TGV-ER
reconstruction across accelerations 2 to 5. Statistical significant differences
are indicated by the * symbol.
4
Discussion
In this work we developed an end-to-end processing pipeline for high-resolution
MRSI data that integrates DL models for image reconstruction and nuisance
signal removal. These two steps are time consuming and of critical impor-
tance for the quality of metabolic images.
The Deep-ER neural network was specially developed to reconstruct non-
cartesian compressed sense MRSI. We demonstrated that Deep-ER provides
high efficiency and quality: 1) The reconstruction time of whole-brain high-
resolution 1H-MRSI 3D FID-ECCENTRIC is greatly reduced by a factor
of almost 600 using Deep-ER compared to conventional TGV-ER. 2) Ef-
14
ficient usage of GPU memory enables multichannel high-resolution MRSI
data processing. 3) High temporal consistency across accelerations reduces
spectral noise and improves precision and accuracy of metabolite quantifi-
cation.
4) Sharper spatial features and less image blurring are achieved
with increasing accelerations. Although we demonstrated Deep-ER for un-
dersampled ECCENTRIC trajectories, the network can be easily applied to
other accelerated spectral-spatial encoding trajectories.
Our learning strategy addresses an important bottleneck in neural net-
work development associated with the scarcity of training data for high
resolution MRSI. Because of the challenges with acquiring high resolution
metabolic MRSI data, it is common practice to use simulated data [48]
instead of measured data for training models of MRSI reconstruction. How-
ever, it is hard to capture by simulations all the complexity of MRSI mea-
surements [6].
In a departure from prior methods, our approach was to
train on the water signal measured by water-unsuppressed MRSI, which is
easier to acquire and can provide high quality ground truth images. This
concept brings high flexibility and makes the network independent of echo-
time, magnetic field and nucleus. Additionally, such training results in a
robust network that can generalize the reconstruction to structures that are
completely different than brain, as proven on phantom data.
When Deep-ER reconstruction of water-unsuppressed MRSI was com-
pared to high quality T1-weighted MRI we observed very good agreement
(NRMSE ≈8%, SSIM ≈0.9). The small image difference is explained by
small difference in acquisition parameters of water-unsuppressed MRSI by
ECCENTRIC and T1-weighted by the standard FLASH sequence [49]. Al-
though we tried to match as closely as possible the acquisition parameters
(TR, TE, FA, matrix, FOV) of the two sequences, there were few differ-
ences such as different RF pulse used for excitation, coil combination and
the use of GRAPPA acceleration for T1-weighted. These can lead to slightly
different image contrast due to RF transmit and receive inhomogeneity at
ultra-high field.
We observed high stability of the Deep-ER reconstruction across the FID
time series with increasing acceleration, in particular for the late time points
that have significantly lower SNR compared to the beginning of the FID.
By comparison there is more variability between FIDs of different accelera-
tions and more FID jittering at high accelerations for TGV-ER and iNUFT
reconstructions. The high fidelity of Deep-ER was important to obtain bet-
ter spectra and correspondingly metabolic maps of superior quality across
accelerations, compared to TGV-ER or iNUFT reconstructions.
At the moment the main limitation of Deep-ER is the matrix size of the
data, which for this work was fixed to 64x64x31. However, due to its efficient
memory utilization and training data generation the network can be trained
for higher matrix sizes, and this will be subject of future work. Further
acceleration of the end-to-end MRSI processing pipeline can be obtained by
15
speeding with deep learning the spectral fitting [50]–[54] and pre-processing
steps (coil combination [55], B0 correction [56] or artifact removal/denoising
[57], [58]).
In addition, the MRSI data quality can be further improved
using real-time motion correction and shim update [59] in combination with
integrated receive-shim arrays [60].
A particular challenge for the reconstruction of undersampled whole-
brain 1H-MRSI data is represented by the overwhelming nuisance signals of
water and fat, which create aliasing artifacts during image reconstruction.
Nuisance signals need to be removed prior to metabolic image reconstruc-
tion, however, conventional methods [61], [62] come with significant pro-
cessing times. For this reason we developed the WALINET neural network
[47] that removes efficiently and accurately the fat and water signals before
reconstruction of metabolite images.
In summary, we demonstrate a robust and fast MRSI processing pipeline
that can be combined with accelerated high-resolution MRSI acquisition to
obtain high quality metabolic imaging of the brain. We expect that such
advanced joint acquisition-reconstruction MRSI methodology will open new
avenues of discovery in neuroscience research and enable high-throughput
workflow consistent with the needs of clinical translation for precision medicine
in patients.
16
Supplementary Material
5
Supplementary Methods
5.1
MRSI pre-processing:
MRSI 4D (k,t) data of each coil channel were pre-processed by apply-
ing Hamming filter and density compensation based on Voronoi diagrams
[63]. Voronoi diagrams were computed based on the ECCENTRIC sampling
scheme and each k-space points was normalized by the area of its assigned
Voronoi vertex. Inverse non-uniform Fourier transform (iNUFT) [40] was
performed with the density compensation for each in-plane partition (kx,ky)
and conventional inverse fast Fourier transformation was applied along the
uniformly sampled kz axis.
Coil combination was performed by multiplication of the adjoint coil
sensitivity profile with each channel and their summation, resulting in the
initial 4D image-time MRSI data. Coil sensitivity profiles were computed
from water un-suppressed MRSI data using ESPIRiT [39].
To compensate for B0 field inhomogeneities, a frequency shift map was
estimated from water un-suppressed measurement and applied on the coil
combined MRSI image [64].
Water residual was removed using Hankel singular value decomposition
[61] and filtering out frequencies from a predefined range around 4.7ppm.
5.2
Deep Learning Lipid Removal:
Before DL reconstruction of the MRSI dataset, the nuisance lipid signal was
removed by a new approach using deep learning to identify the lipid sig-
nal. The WALINET (WAter and LIpid neural NETwork) method provides
an improvement over the conventional L2-lipid regularization suppression
method [62].
The network architecture was based on Y-Net [65] with 2 encoders and
1 decoder.
The encoders and decoders consist of 4 convolutional blocks
followed by MaxPooling or upsampling. Each convolutional block contains
dropout, two convolutional layers and two ReLU activation functions. Skip
connections are applied between the blocks in the encoders and decoder.
Full details about WALINET are presented in [47].
17
5.3
TGV-ER Reconstruction:
A low-rank (LR) model constrained with Total-Generalized-Variation (TGV)
was used for the TGV-ER reconstruction [7]
arg min
U,V,L
∥W (s −FCB (UV + L))∥2
2
+λ PK
c=1 TGV2{Uc},
(7)
where s is the measured data, F the non-uniform Fourier transform (NUFT)
encoding operator, C the coil sensitivity operator, B the B0 frequency shift
operator and L represents the lipid signal (Nr by T array) located at the
skull that is reconstructed simultaneously with spatial (U) and temporal
(V) low-rank components of the brain metabolites signal. W, is a weight-
ing operator of a Hamming window shape. TGV2 is the total generalized
variation regularization with parameter λ [43].
The regularization parameter used in the reconstruction was adjusted to
λ = 3 × 10−4 and K was specifically set to 40, identical to the original work
[7]. The metabolite ECCENTRIC reconstruction described by Equation 7
is referred in this paper as TGV-ER.
The TGV-ER was employed with some modification to obtain the ground
truth water image xGT used for training the Interlacer network (Eqs. 5-6).
For this purpose, the low-rank assumption and the lipid reconstruction (L)
steps were omitted, since spectral decomposition and lipid removal is not
required for the water signal.
Each time-point in the water dataset was
treated as an independent image and reconstructed sequentially using the
TGV-ER method.
5.4
Spectral fitting
Spectral fitting of metabolites was performed by LCModel [46] using a basis
set containing spectra simulated by NMR quantum mechanics in GAMMA
(19) for twenty-two metabolites: phosphorylcholine (PCh), glycerophospho-
rylcholine (GPC), creatine (Cr), phosphocreatine (PCr), gamma-aminobutyric
acid (GABA), glutamate (Glu), glutamine (Gln), glycine (Gly), glutathione
(GSH), myo-inositol (Ins), N-acetylaspartate (NAA), N-acetyl aspartylglu-
tamate (NAAG), scylloinositol (Sci), lactate (Lac), threonine (Thr), beta-
glucose (bGlu), alanine (Ala), aspartate (Asp), ascorbate (Asc), serine (Ser),
taurine (Tau), and 2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG) and a measured macromolecu-
lar background [66]. The spectral fitting was done for 1ppm-4.2ppm spectral
range and the results for each voxel were used to generate metabolic im-
ages. The unsupressed water signal was used as quantification reference for
metabolites concentrations (institutional units, I.U.) to compare metabolite
levels across subjects and scanners. To assess the quality of the MRSI data
and fit, linewidth (FWHM), signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and Cramer-Rao
lower bounds (CRLB) goodness of fit maps were generated.
18
5.5
Image quality metrics
To assess the quality of image reconstruction methods and the agreement
with the ground truth the normalized root mean square error (NRMSE),
correlation coefficients (CC), and the structure similarity index (SSIM) [67]
were calculated .
5.6
High resolution metabolic phantom
A custom made high resolution metabolic phantom with geometry similar
to Derenzo molecular imaging phantom [68] contained 5 sets of tubes with
diameters of 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 mm as shown in Figure 3. Each set contained
6 tubes of identical diameters separated by a distance equal to twice the
inner diameter positioned in a triangular configuration. In every set, the
six tubes were filled with metabolite solutions including 10 mM of creatine.
Magnevist (Gd-DTPA) was added (1 mL/L) in each tube to shorten T1 and
create T1-weighted contrast for structural MRI. The whole tube structure
was inserted in a large cylindrical container (13.33 cm inner diameter) which
was filled with 10 mM NaCl solution.
19
6
Supplementary Results
Supplementary Figure 1: Comparison of different MRSI reconstruction
methods across accelerations from 1 to 5. Four different metabolic maps
are presented for each method and acceleration, including total NAA, total
Cr, total Cho and Glu. Examples of spectra obtained by each method are
shown overlaid at the bottom for each acceleration. Arrow indicate the voxel
location for the spectra.
20
Supplementary Figure 2: Quantitative comparison between Deep-ER
and TGV-ER showing plots of NRMSE, SSIM and Correlation Coefficient
across accelerations 2 to 5 for five metabolic maps including NAA+NAAG,
GPC+PCh, Cr+PCr, Glu+Gln and Ins+Gly. Line plots show the mean
across all subjects, and the error bar represent the standard deviation.
Supplementary Figure 3
21
References
[1]
A. A. Maudsley, O. C. Andronesi, P. B. Barker, et al., “Advanced
magnetic resonance spectroscopic neuroimaging: Experts’ consensus
recommendations,” NMR in Biomedicine, vol. 34, no. 5, e4309, 2021.
[2]
W. Bogner, S. Gruber, S. Trattnig, and M. Chmelik, “High-resolution
mapping of human brain metabolites by free induction decay 1h mrsi
at 7 t,” NMR in Biomedicine, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 873–882, 2012.
[3]
J. M. Duarte, H. Lei, V. Mlyn´arik, and R. Gruetter, “The neurochem-
ical profile quantified by in vivo 1H NMR spectroscopy,” Neuroimage,
vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 342–362, 2012.
[4]
G. ¨Oz, J. R. Alger, P. B. Barker, et al., “Clinical proton mr spec-
troscopy in central nervous system disorders,” Radiology, vol. 270,
no. 3, pp. 658–679, 2014.
[5]
W. Bogner, R. Otazo, and A. Henning, “Accelerated MR spectro-
scopic imaging—a review of current and emerging techniques,” NMR
in Biomedicine, vol. 34, no. 5, e4314, 2021.
[6]
F. Lam, X. Peng, and Z.-P. Liang, “High-dimensional mr spatiospec-
tral imaging by integrating physics-based modeling and data-driven
machine learning: Current progress and future directions,” IEEE sig-
nal processing magazine, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 101–115, 2023.
[7]
A. Klauser, B. Strasser, W. Bogner, et al., “Eccentric: A fast and
unrestrained approach for high-resolution in vivo metabolic imaging
at ultra-high field mr,” ArXiv, 2023.
[8]
L. Hingerl, B. Strasser, P. Moser, et al., “Clinical high-resolution 3d-
mr spectroscopic imaging of the human brain at 7 t,” Investigative
radiology, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 239–248, 2020.
[9]
R.-J. Ho and F. Lam, “High-resolution 3d spin-echo mrsi using in-
terleaved water navigators, sparse sampling and subspace-based pro-
cessing,” in 2020 42nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC), IEEE, 2020,
pp. 1465–1468.
[10]
F. Knoll, K. Hammernik, C. Zhang, et al., “Deep-learning methods
for parallel magnetic resonance imaging reconstruction: A survey of
the current approaches, trends, and issues,” IEEE signal processing
magazine, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 128–140, 2020.
[11]
K. Hammernik, J. Schlemper, C. Qin, J. Duan, R. M. Summers, and
D. Rueckert, “Systematic evaluation of iterative deep neural networks
for fast parallel mri reconstruction with sensitivity-weighted coil com-
bination,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, vol. 86, no. 4, pp. 1859–
1872, 2021.
22
[12]
F. Lam, Y. Li, and X. Peng, “Constrained magnetic resonance spectro-
scopic imaging by learning nonlinear low-dimensional models,” IEEE
transactions on medical imaging, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 545–555, 2019.
[13]
P. Weiser, S. Motyka, W. Bogner, and G. Langs, “Reconstruction and
coil combination of undersampled concentric-ring MRSI data using a
Graph U-Net,” in Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, 2021.
[14]
S. Nassirpour, P. Chang, and A. Henning, “MultiNet PyGRAPPA:
Multiple neural networks for reconstructing variable density GRAPPA
(a 1H FID MRSI study),” NeuroImage, vol. 183, pp. 336–345, 2018.
[15]
D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Learning rep-
resentations by back-propagating errors,” nature, vol. 323, no. 6088,
pp. 533–536, 1986.
[16]
R. Hecht-Nielsen, “Theory of the backpropagation neural network,”
in Neural networks for perception, Elsevier, 1992, pp. 65–93.
[17]
D. C. Cire¸san, U. Meier, L. M. Gambardella, and J. Schmidhuber,
“Deep, big, simple neural nets for handwritten digit recognition,” Neu-
ral computation, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 3207–3220, 2010.
[18]
V. Vishnevskiy, J. Walheim, and S. Kozerke, “Deep variational net-
work for rapid 4d flow mri reconstruction,” Nature Machine Intelli-
gence, vol. 2, pp. 228–235, 2020.
[19]
S. Wang, Z. Su, L. Ying, et al., “Accelerating magnetic resonance imag-
ing via deep learning,” in 2016 IEEE 13th international symposium on
biomedical imaging (ISBI), IEEE, 2016, pp. 514–517.
[20]
H. K. Aggarwal, M. P. Mani, and M. Jacob, “Modl: Model-based
deep learning architecture for inverse problems,” IEEE transactions
on medical imaging, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 394–405, 2018.
[21]
K. Hammernik, T. Klatzer, E. Kobler, et al., “Learning a variational
network for reconstruction of accelerated MRI data,” Magnetic reso-
nance in medicine, vol. 79, no. 6, pp. 3055–3071, 2018.
[22]
C. M. Hyun, H. P. Kim, S. M. Lee, S. Lee, and J. K. Seo, “Deep
learning for undersampled MRI reconstruction,” Physics in Medicine
& Biology, vol. 63, no. 13, p. 135 007, 2018.
[23]
J. Schlemper, J. Caballero, J. V. Hajnal, A. N. Price, and D. Rueckert,
“A deep cascade of convolutional neural networks for dynamic mr
image reconstruction,” IEEE transactions on Medical Imaging, vol. 37,
no. 2, pp. 491–503, 2017.
[24]
T. K¨ustner, K. Armanious, J. Yang, B. Yang, F. Schick, and S. Gatidis,
“Retrospective correction of motion-affected MR images using deep
learning frameworks,” Magnetic resonance in medicine, vol. 82, no. 4,
pp. 1527–1540, 2019.
23
[25]
R. Shaw, C. H. Sudre, T. Varsavsky, S. Ourselin, and M. J. Cardoso,
“A k-space model of movement artefacts: application to segmentation
augmentation and artefact removal,” IEEE transactions on medical
imaging, vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 2881–2892, 2020.
[26]
N. M. Singh, N. Dey, M. Hoffmann, et al., “Data consistent deep
rigid mri motion correction,” in Medical Imaging with Deep Learning,
PMLR, 2024, pp. 368–381.
[27]
B. Yaman, S. A. H. Hosseini, S. Moeller, J. Ellermann, K. U˘gurbil,
and M. Ak¸cakaya, “Self-supervised physics-based deep learning MRI
reconstruction without fully-sampled data,” in 2020 IEEE 17th In-
ternational Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), IEEE, 2020,
pp. 921–925.
[28]
B. Yaman, S. A. H. Hosseini, and M. Ak¸cakaya, “Zero-shot self-supervised
learning for MRI reconstruction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.07737,
2021.
[29]
P. M. Johnson, D. J. Lin, J. Zbontar, et al., “Deep learning reconstruc-
tion enables prospectively accelerated clinical knee MRI,” Radiology,
vol. 307, no. 2, e220425, 2023.
[30]
B. Zhou, N. Dey, J. Schlemper, et al., “DSFormer: A dual-domain
self-supervised transformer for accelerated multi-contrast MRI recon-
struction,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on
Applications of Computer Vision, 2023, pp. 4966–4975.
[31]
J. Lee, H. Seo, W. Lee, and H. Park, “Unsupervised motion artifact
correction of turbo spin-echo MRI using deep image prior,” Magnetic
Resonance in Medicine, 2024.
[32]
B. Zhu, J. Z. Liu, S. F. Cauley, B. R. Rosen, and M. S. Rosen, “Im-
age reconstruction by domain-transform manifold learning,” Nature,
vol. 555, no. 7697, pp. 487–492, 2018.
[33]
R. Souza and R. Frayne, “A hybrid frequency-domain/image-domain
deep network for magnetic resonance image reconstruction,” in 2019
32nd SIBGRAPI Conference on Graphics, Patterns and Images (SIB-
GRAPI), IEEE, 2019, pp. 257–264.
[34]
G. Wang, E. Gong, S. Banerjee, J. Pauly, and G. Zaharchuk, “Ac-
celerated mri reconstruction with dual-domain generative adversar-
ial network,” in Machine Learning for Medical Image Reconstruction:
Second International Workshop, MLMIR 2019, Held in Conjunction
with MICCAI 2019, Shenzhen, China, October 17, 2019, Proceedings
2, Springer, 2019, pp. 47–57.
24
[35]
B. Zhou and S. K. Zhou, “DuDoRNet: learning a dual-domain recur-
rent network for fast MRI reconstruction with deep T1 prior,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2020, pp. 4273–4282.
[36]
Z. Wang, H. Jiang, H. Du, J. Xu, and B. Qiu, “IKWI-net: A cross-
domain convolutional neural network for undersampled magnetic res-
onance image reconstruction,” Magnetic resonance imaging, vol. 73,
pp. 1–10, 2020.
[37]
N. M. Singh, J. E. Iglesias, E. Adalsteinsson, A. V. Dalca, and P. Gol-
land, “Joint frequency and image space learning for MRI reconstruc-
tion and analysis,” The journal of machine learning for biomedical
imaging, vol. 2022, 2022.
[38]
D. N. Louis, A. Perry, P. Wesseling, et al., “The 2021 who classification
of tumors of the central nervous system: A summary,” Neuro-oncology,
vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 1231–1251, 2021.
[39]
M. Uecker, P. Lai, M. J. Murphy, et al., “Espirit—an eigenvalue ap-
proach to autocalibrating parallel mri: Where sense meets grappa,”
Magnetic resonance in medicine, vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 990–1001, 2014.
[40]
S. Bagchi and S. K. Mitra, “The nonuniform discrete fourier transform
and its applications in filter design. i. 1-d,” IEEE Transactions on
Circuits and Systems II: Analog and Digital Signal Processing, vol. 43,
no. 6, pp. 422–433, 1996.
[41]
S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep net-
work training by reducing internal covariate shift,” in International
conference on machine learning, pmlr, 2015, pp. 448–456.
[42]
M. Hoffmann, N. M. Singh, A. V. Dalca, B. Fischl, and R. Frost, “Can
we predict motion artifacts in clinical mri before the scan completes?”
In Proceedings of the International Society for Magnetic Resonance in
Medicine... Scientific Meeting and Exhibition. International Society
for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine. Scientific Meeting and Exhibi-
tion, NIH Public Access, vol. 2023, 2023.
[43]
F. Knoll, K. Bredies, T. Pock, and R. Stollberger, “Second order total
generalized variation (tgv) for mri,” Magnetic resonance in medicine,
vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 480–491, 2011.
[44]
M. Hoffmann, A. Hoopes, B. Fischl, and A. V. Dalca, “Anatomy-
specific acquisition-agnostic affine registration learned from fictitious
images,” in Medical Imaging 2023: Image Processing, SPIE, vol. 12464,
2023, p. 1 246 402.
[45]
D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimiza-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
25
[46]
S. W. Provencher, “Lcmodel & lcmgui user’s manual,” LCModel ver-
sion, vol. 6, no. 3, 2014.
[47]
P. Weiser, G. Langs, S. Motyka, et al., “Lipcon: Lipid identification
with convolutional neural network for mr spectroscopic imaging,” Pro-
ceedings of the ISMRM, no. 7832, 2024.
[48]
F. Lam, Y. Li, R. Guo, B. Clifford, and Z.-P. Liang, “Ultrafast mag-
netic resonance spectroscopic imaging using spice with learned sub-
spaces,” Magnetic resonance in medicine, vol. 83, no. 2, pp. 377–390,
2020.
[49]
M. D. Frahm J Haase A, “Rapid three-dimensional mr imaging us-
ing the flash technique,” Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography,
vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 363–368, 1986.
[50]
S. S. Gurbani, S. Sheriff, A. A. Maudsley, H. Shim, and L. A. Cooper,
“Incorporation of a spectral model in a convolutional neural network
for accelerated spectral fitting,” Magnetic resonance in medicine, vol. 81,
no. 5, pp. 3346–3357, 2019.
[51]
A. Shamaei, J. Starcukova, I. Pavlova, and Z. Starcuk Jr, “Model-
informed unsupervised deep learning approaches to frequency and
phase correction of mrs signals,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine,
vol. 89, no. 3, pp. 1221–1236, 2023.
[52]
A. Shamaei, J. Starcukova, and Z. Starcuk Jr, “Physics-informed deep
learning approach to quantification of human brain metabolites from
magnetic resonance spectroscopy data,” Computers in Biology and
Medicine, vol. 158, p. 106 837, 2023.
[53]
Y. Zhang and J. Shen, “Quantification of spatially localized mrs by
a novel deep learning approach without spectral fitting,” Magnetic
resonance in medicine, vol. 90, no. 4, pp. 1282–1296, 2023.
[54]
D. Chen, M. Lin, H. Liu, et al., “Magnetic resonance spectroscopy
quantification aided by deep estimations of imperfection factors and
macromolecular signal,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineer-
ing, 2024.
[55]
S. Motyka, L. Hingerl, B. Strasser, et al., “K-space-based coil combi-
nation via geometric deep learning for reconstruction of non-cartesian
mrsi data,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, vol. 86, no. 5, pp. 2353–
2367, 2021.
[56]
S. Motyka, P. Weiser, B. Bachrata, et al., “Predicting dynamic, motion-
related changes in b 0 field in the brain at a 7t mri using a subject-
specific fine-trained u-net,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 2024.
[57]
M. Raki´c, F. Turco, G. Weng, F. Maes, D. M. Sima, and J. Slotboom,
“Deep learning pipeline for quality filtering of mrsi spectra,” NMR in
Biomedicine, vol. 37, no. 7, e5012, 2024.
26
[58]
J. Wang, B. Ji, Y. Lei, T. Liu, H. Mao, and X. Yang, “Denoising mag-
netic resonance spectroscopy (mrs) data using stacked autoencoder for
improving signal-to-noise ratio and speed of mrs,” Medical Physics,
vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 7955–7966, 2023.
[59]
W. Bogner, A. T. Hess, B. Gagoski, et al., “Real-time motion- and
b-correction for laser-localized spiral-accelerated 3d-mrsi of the brain
at 3t,” Neuroimage, vol. 88C, pp. 22–31, 2013.
[60]
M. Esmaeili, J. Stockmann, B. Strasser, et al., “An integrated rf-
receive/b(0)-shim array coil boosts performance of whole-brain mr
spectroscopic imaging at 7t,” Scientific Reports, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 15 029–
15 046, 2020.
[61]
E. Cabanes, S. Confort-Gouny, Y. Le Fur, G. Simond, and P. Cozzone,
“Optimization of residual water signal removal by hlsvd on simulated
short echo time proton mr spectra of the human brain,” Journal of
Magnetic Resonance, vol. 150, no. 2, pp. 116–125, 2001.
[62]
B. Bilgic, I. Chatnuntawech, A. P. Fan, et al., “Fast image reconstruc-
tion with l2-regularization,” Journal of magnetic resonance imaging,
vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 181–191, 2014.
[63]
W. Q. Malik, H. A. Khan, D. J. Edwards, and C. J. Stevens, “A grid-
ding algorithm for efficient density compensation of arbitrarily sam-
pled fourier-domain data,” in IEEE/Sarnoff Symposium on Advances
in Wired and Wireless Communication, 2005., IEEE, 2005, pp. 125–
128.
[64]
A. Klauser, B. Strasser, B. Thapa, F. Lazeyras, and O. Andronesi,
“Achieving high-resolution 1h-mrsi of the human brain with compressed-
sensing and low-rank reconstruction at 7 tesla,” Journal of Magnetic
Resonance, vol. 331, p. 107 048, 2021.
[65]
A. Mohammed, S. Yildirim, I. Farup, M. Pedersen, and Ø. Hovde, “Y-
net: A deep convolutional neural network for polyp detection,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1806.01907, 2018.
[66]
M. Povaˇzan, G. Hangel, B. Strasser, et al., “Mapping of brain macro-
molecules and their use for spectral processing of 1h-mrsi data with an
ultra-short acquisition delay at 7 t,” Neuroimage, vol. 121, pp. 126–
135, 2015.
[67]
Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image qual-
ity assessment: From error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE
transactions on image processing, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, 2004.
[68]
S. Derenzo, T. Budinger, J. Cahoon, R. Huesman, and H. Jackson,
“High resolution computed tomography of positron emitters,” IEEE
transactions on Nuclear Science, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 544–558, 1977.
27
