CCIS-DIFF: A GENERATIVE MODEL WITH STABLE DIFFUSION PRIOR FOR
CONTROLLED COLONOSCOPY IMAGE SYNTHESIS
Yifan Xie1,4, Jingge Wang2,3, Tao Feng2, Fei Ma4∗, Yang Li2,3∗
1School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
3Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Ubiquitous Data Enabling, Shenzhen, China
4Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy (SZ), Shenzhen, China
ABSTRACT
Colonoscopy is crucial for identifying adenomatous polyps
and preventing colorectal cancer. However, developing ro-
bust models for polyp detection is challenging by the limited
size and accessibility of existing colonoscopy datasets. While
previous efforts have attempted to synthesize colonoscopy
images, current methods suffer from instability and insuffi-
cient data diversity. Moreover, these approaches lack precise
control over the generation process, resulting in images that
fail to meet clinical quality standards.
To address these
challenges, we propose CCIS-DIFF, a Controlled genera-
tive model for high-quality Colonoscopy Image Synthesis
based on a Diffusion architecture. Our method offers pre-
cise control over both the spatial attributes (polyp location
and shape) and clinical characteristics of polyps that align
with clinical descriptions. Specifically, we introduce a blur
mask weighting strategy to seamlessly blend synthesized
polyps with the colonic mucosa, and a text-aware attention
mechanism to guide the generated images to reflect clini-
cal characteristics. Notably, to achieve this, we construct a
new multi-modal colonoscopy dataset that integrates images,
mask annotations, and corresponding clinical text descrip-
tions.
Experimental results demonstrate that our method
generates high-quality, diverse colonoscopy images with fine
control over both spatial constraints and clinical consistency,
offering valuable support for downstream segmentation and
diagnostic tasks.
Index Terms— Colonoscopy Image Synthesis, Con-
trolled Synthesis, Stable Diffusion
1. INTRODUCTION
Colonoscopy is an essential tool for detecting adenomatous
polyps and reducing rectal cancer mortality rates [1, ?, ?].
However, training models for automatic polyp detection is
challenging due to the small scale of available colonoscopy
∗Corresponding email: mafei@gml.ac.cn, yangli@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
Mask
+ Text: The polyp is pinkish, with a smooth texture against a background of darker mucosa with some yellowish debris.
ArSDM
ControlNet
CCIS-DIFF (Ours)
Fig. 1. In contrast to ArSDM [2] and ControlNet [3], CCIS-
DIFF can utilize not only mask but also textual description to
generate high-fidelity, text-consistent colonoscopy images.
datasets, making it difficult to have sufficient robustness and
generalization that meet real-world clinical demands.
To address this problem, previous methods [4, 5, 2, 6] pri-
marily relied on generative adversarial networks or diffusion
models to synthesize more colonoscopy images. Although
these efforts aim to address the data scarcity problem, they
struggle to generate a sufficiently diverse and high-quality im-
age, and the generation process lacks adequate control, lead-
ing to images that fail to meet clinical requirements for prac-
tical use. As illustrated in Fig. 1, ArSDM [2] only utilizes
the mask to synthesize the colonoscopy image and the gener-
ated image is of poor quality and contains noise. Meanwhile,
large-scale text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models such as Sta-
ble Diffusion [7] and DALL·E [8] have demonstrated remark-
able capabilities in generating images from various prompts.
This raises an important question: Can colonoscopy images
be generated in a controlled manner using a pre-trained large-
scale T2I model? In response, we present an innovative gener-
ative method to synthesize high-quality colonoscopy images
in a controlled manner. The main contributions of this paper
can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel generative model, named CCIS-DIFF,
which offers fine control over both the spatial attributes
and clinical characteristics of polyps, enabling more clin-
ically consistent image synthesis for practical use.
• We introduce the blur mask weighting strategy to en-
sure seamless integration of synthesized polyps with the
colonic mucosa, along with a text-aware attention mecha-
nism that incorporates textual information into the gener-
ation process, to enable customization of polyp images.
arXiv:2411.12198v1  [cs.CV]  19 Nov 2024
❄
Original Image
Sample
The polyp is 
pink, smooth-
textured, and 
slightly swollen, 
set against a 
background of 
mucosal tissue 
with some 
yellowish debris.
Text
🔥
Mask
Gaussian Blur
Blur Mask
Attention Map
Sharing Q, K
Updated
Attention Map
Cross
Attention
Trainable Modules
❄
🔥
N times
Mask
Encoder
VAE
Encoder
Text 
Encoder
❄
⊕
🔥
Mask
Encoder
🔥
Weighting
ResNet
Block
x2
Self
Attention
Score
Analysis
Noise
Embedding
Text
Embedding
Blur Mask
Embedding
Cross
Attention
ResNet
Block
Output
Noise
Frozen Modules
⊕Element Addition
❄
Input Text
LLM Agent
Image
Mask
Given a colonoscopy image and a 
corresponding polyp segmentation 
mask, please describe the polyps 
in terms of color, shape, texture, 
swollen degree and background.
The polyp is pink, 
round, smooth-
textured, and slightly 
swollen, set against a 
background of mucosal 
tissue with some 
yellowish debris.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2. (a) The overall architecture of CCIS-DIFF. The parameters of the frozen modules refer to Stable Diffusion v1.5 [7]. The
trainable modules incorporate a text-aware attention mechanism to address the issue of neglecting text prompts. Additionally,
we introduce a blur mask weighting strategy to ensure seamless integration of synthesized polyps with the colonic mucosa. (b)
The construction pipeline of the multi-modal colonoscopy dataset.
• We design the first multi-modal colonoscopy dataset that
uniquely combines colonoscopy images, segmentation
masks, and clinical text descriptions, providing precise
alignment between visual data and clinical information
for improved training and evaluation.
2. METHOD
2.1. Multi-Modal Colonoscopy Dataset
A key challenge for current diffusion models in colonoscopy
image synthesis [2, 6] is the absence of a dataset with con-
sistent spatial characteristics of polyps and their correspond-
ing clinical textual descriptions. Existing datasets, such as
EndoScene [9], CVC-ClinicDB [10], and Kvasir [11], pri-
marily contain image-mask pairs that focus on polyp regions.
However, these datasets do not include detailed clinical text
descriptions, limiting their usefulness for training models
that aim to generate clinically accurate and diverse synthetic
images.
To address this limitation, we construct a novel
multi-modal colonoscopy dataset that integrates three essen-
tial components: colonoscopy images, segmentation masks,
and clinical text descriptions. Such a dataset is vital for fine-
tuning pretrained diffusion models, allowing them to adapt
effectively to controlled colonoscopy image synthesis.
An overview of our dataset construction process is shown
in Fig. 2 (b). To generate accurate captions that accurately
reflect both spatial constraints and relevant clinical charac-
teristics, we construct the open-source LLaMA [12] large
language model (LLM) agent.
This agent takes a textual
prompt and an image-mask colonoscopy pair to create cap-
tions for both the foreground and background. To increase
textual diversity, the LLM incorporates different aspects like
color, shape, texture, and swelling. As a result, we develop
a multi-modal colonoscopy dataset consisting of triplets of
colonoscopy images, mask images, and their corresponding
textual descriptions which provides the necessary foundation
for generating images with improved realism and variability.
2.2. CCIS-DIFF Architecture
2.2.1. Overview
The overview architecture of our CCIS-DIFF is presented in
Fig. 2 (a). Using our multi-modal colonoscopy dataset, we
provide the original colonoscopy image I, the mask image
M, and the corresponding text description T. Each of these
components passes through its respective encoder, noting that
the text encoder is frozen. Additionally, we develop a blur
mask to ensure that the generated polyp integrates seamlessly
with the background, the detailed description will be illus-
trated in Sec. 2.2.2.
Based on ControlNet [3], we adopt the trainable diffusion
branch and implement the zero convolution strategy to protect
this branch by eliminating random noise as gradients in the
initial training steps. This structure, when applied to large
models like Stable Diffusion [7], enables the frozen param-
eters to preserve the integrity of the production-ready model
that has been trained on billions of images.
Meanwhile,
the trainable diffusion branch leverages this large-scale pre-
trained model to establish a robust backbone for managing
multi-modal input conditions. Furthermore, to address the
issue of neglecting text prompt and effectively incorporating
textual information into the generation process, we incor-
porate a text-aware attention mechanism (Sec. 2.2.3) in the
trainable diffusion branch.
2.2.2. Blur Mask Weighting Strategy
The purpose of the blur mask weighting strategy is to en-
sure that the generated polyp is seamlessly integrated with the
background. To achieve this, we apply a Gaussian blur opera-
tion σ to the mask image M, softening the transition between
the polyp mask region and the background. We utilize two
separate mask encoders to extract features from the mask and
the blurred mask, each with non-shared parameters. Subse-
quently, a weighting matrix Mw is introduced to balance the
two mask branches, and Mw is learned using a three-layer
MLP. Thus the blur mask embedding Fb can be constructed
as:
Fb = Mw ⊙Em(σ(M)),
(1)
where ⊙is the Hadamard product and Em denotes the mask
encoder.
2.2.3. Text-Aware Attention Mechanism
In our experiments, we observed that existing methods, such
as ControlNet [3], often overlook the text prompt and rely
more heavily on the mask image. We hypothesize that this
visual dominance over the text prompt arises from the text-
free nature of the self-attention layers. To address this issue,
we propose a text-aware attention mechanism that leverages
the cross-attention matrix to regulate the output of the self-
attention.
Given the noise embedding Fn, it is first passed through
a ResNet block, as referenced in ControlNet [3]. Following
this, we obtain the attention input tensor Fa ∈R(h×w)×d,
which is processed through projection layers to derive the
queries Qs, keys Ks, and values Vs, as well as the attention
map Ms = QsKT
s
√
d
∈Rhw×hw. To reduce the strong influ-
ence of the mask image, we adjust the attention scores of the
prompt text. Specifically, we begin by constructing the cross-
attention similarity matrix:
Mc = SoftMax(QcKT
c /
√
d),
(2)
where Qc ∈R(h×w)×d, Kc ∈Rl×d represent the query and
key tensors from their corresponding cross-attention layers,
and l denotes the number of tokens in the text prompt. For
each pixel j, we define its similarity to the text prompt by
summing its similarity scores with the embedding indexed by
Mc. We then apply a clamp operation to normalize the scores
sj within the range [0, 1]:
sj = Norm(Sumj(Mc)).
(3)
By calculating the scores for each pixel, we can obtain the
final text-aware map S. Subsequently, we utilize S to com-
pute the updated attention map and refine the self-attention
process.
Finally, the output of the cross-attention mechanism inter-
acts once more with the blur mask embedding, generating the
final output embedding through a ResNet block.
Table 1. The quantitative results of the colonoscopy image
synthesis. The boldface indicates the best performance.
Method
FID ↓
CLIP-score ↑
CLIP-image ↑
ControlNet
87.32
30.78
87.09
Uni-ControlNet
92.74
30.57
86.46
Ours
71.73
31.96
88.70
2.2.4. Training and Inference
During the training phase, the diffusion models start with an
original image I and progressively add noise to create a noisy
embedding It, where t indicates the number of times noise
is added. The models learn a network ϵθ to predict the noise
added to the noisy image It, based on a set of conditions that
include the time step t, a text prompt T, and a mask image
M. The overall loss function L for the entire diffusion model
is represented as:
L = EI,t,T,M,ϵ∼N (0,1)
h
∥ϵ −ϵθ(It, t, T, M))∥2
2
i
.
(4)
Additionally, we randomly replace half of the text prompts
with empty strings. This strategy enhances the model’s ability
to directly recognize the semantics of the input mask image,
serving as a substitute for the text prompt.
During the inference phase, the diffusion models auto-
matically generate noise and produce the final colonoscopy
images based on a text prompt and a mask image. Simul-
taneously, we utilize Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) [13] to
enhance the sampling process.
3. EXPERIMENT AND RESULTS
3.1. Implementation Details
All methods were implemented in PyTorch on a single
NVIDIA A100 40G GPU. We utilized the pre-trained Sta-
ble Diffusion v1.5 [7] model, following ControlNet [3], to
replicate its UNet encoder as the trainable copy encoder. The
batch size was configured to 4, and the learning rate was set
to 1e-5. For inference, we used a default CFG scale of 7.0.
The DDIM sampler was employed, using 20 steps to sample
each image.
3.2. Baseline Algorithms and Evaluation Metrics
For the colonoscopy image synthesis task, we compared our
method with ControlNet [3] and Uni-ControlNet [14], all of
which were trained on our multi-modal colonoscopy dataset.
Following [3], we assessed performance using FID, CLIP-
score, and CLIP-image (measuring the similarity between the
generated image and the reference image).
For the downstream polyp segmentation task, we utilized
PraNet [1] and Polyp-PVT [15] as baseline segmentation
The polyp is pale pink, smooth, and slightly swollen, 
with a background of normal mucosal folds.
Mask-1
Mask-2
Mask-3
Text-1
ControlNet
Ours
Uni-ControlNet
The polyp is pinkish, slightly swollen, with a smooth 
texture against a background of darker mucosa with 
some yellowish debris.
Text-2
ControlNet
Uni-ControlNet
Ours
The polyp is reddish in color, and appears smooth and 
significant swollen, contrasting against the darker 
colon background.
Text-3
ControlNet
Uni-ControlNet
Ours
Fig. 3. Qualitative comparison of colonoscopy image synthesis.
Table 2. User study. The rating scale ranges from 1 to 5, with
higher numbers indicating better performance.
Method
Image Fidelity
Mask Accuracy
Text Accuracy
ControlNet
3.852
3.962
3.918
Uni-ControlNet
2.904
2.966
3.392
Ours
4.266
4.466
4.518
Table 3. Comparisons of different settings applied on two
polyp segmentation baselines [1, 15] across three public
datasets [9, 10, 11].
EndoScene
CVC-ClinicDB
Kvasir
Settings
mDice
mIoU
mDice
mIoU
mDice
mIoU
PraNet
86.1
79.1
90.8
86.1
89.2
84.0
PraNet + ControlNet
85.4
77.7
90.1
85.1
90.6
85.2
PraNet + Uni-ControlNet
85.9
78.2
89.5
85.1
87.9
82.5
PraNet + Ours
88.5
81.0
92.8
88.0
92.8
87.1
PVT
88.2
81.2
92.8
87.6
91.5
86.8
PVT + ControlNet
88.3
81.4
92.7
88.2
90.3
84.8
PVT + Uni-ControlNet
85.8
79.6
89.3
83.8
86.5
80.7
PVT + Ours
89.3
82.1
93.5
88.4
92.4
87.0
models with their default settings, and assessed their perfor-
mance using mean Dice (mDice) and mean Intersection over
Union (mIoU) metrics.
3.3. Results
The quantitative results of the colonoscopy image synthesis
are illustrated in Table 1. Our method outperforms others
in both visual quality and text alignment. Furthermore, we
present a comparison of our method with others in Fig. 3. The
results show that the polyp region generated by our method is
more consistent with the mask image, and the overall infor-
mation aligns more closely with the text prompt.
To conduct a more comprehensive evaluation, we imple-
mented a user study questionnaire. We selected 30 groups of
images for comparison and invited 15 clinical experts from
the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University to par-
ticipate in the survey. Participants were required to rate the
synthesized images based on three criteria: image fidelity,
mask accuracy, and text accuracy. The average scores for each
The polyp is red in color, with a rough and textured surface, 
moderately swollen, and situated against the pinkish background 
of the colon with some reflective spots and yellow mucus.
Text
Mask-1
Mask-2
Ours
w/o TAAM
w/o BMWS
Fig. 4. Visualization of the ablation experiments.
criterion are presented in Table 2. Our method outperforms
the other methods in all aspects.
To further verify the effectiveness of our synthetic images,
we evaluated our method against state-of-the-art methods for
the polyp segmentation task. We generated the same num-
ber of samples as the diffusion training set using the original
masks, which we then combined to create a new downstream
training dataset. The experimental results presented in Table 3
highlight the effectiveness of our method in training improved
downstream models that achieve superior performance.
We also conduct ablation visualization experiments to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the Blur Mask Weighting
Strategy (BMWS) and the Text-Aware Attention Mechanism
(TAAM). The results are illustrated in Fig. 4. The combina-
tion of BMWS and TAAM significantly enhances the quality
of the synthesized images and text alignment.
4. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present CCIS-DIFF, a generative model
that leverages a Stable Diffusion prior for the controlled
colonoscopy image synthesis.
We begin by developing a
blur mask weighting strategy to seamlessly integrate the
generated polyp with the colonic mucosa, along with a text-
aware attention mechanism to address the issue of neglect-
ing text prompt. Additionally, we introduce a multi-modal
colonoscopy dataset created by large language models. Ex-
tensive experiments across various settings demonstrate the
superior performance of CCIS-DIFF.
5. COMPLIANCE WITH ETHICAL STANDARDS
This research study was conducted retrospectively using hu-
man subject data made available in open access. Ethical ap-
proval was not required as confirmed by the license attached
with the open access data.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Deng-Ping Fan, Ge-Peng Ji, Tao Zhou, Geng Chen,
Huazhu Fu, Jianbing Shen, and Ling Shao, “Pranet: Par-
allel reverse attention network for polyp segmentation,”
in International conference on medical image comput-
ing and computer-assisted intervention. Springer, 2020,
pp. 263–273.
[2] Yuhao Du, Yuncheng Jiang, Shuangyi Tan, Xusheng
Wu, Qi Dou, Zhen Li, Guanbin Li, and Xiang Wan, “Ar-
sdm: colonoscopy images synthesis with adaptive re-
finement semantic diffusion models,” in International
conference on medical image computing and computer-
assisted intervention. Springer, 2023, pp. 339–349.
[3] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala,
“Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion
models,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp. 3836–3847.
[4] Yuhui Ma, Yonghuai Liu, Jun Cheng, Yalin Zheng,
Morteza Ghahremani, Honghan Chen, Jiang Liu, and
Yitian Zhao,
“Cycle structure and illumination con-
strained gan for medical image enhancement,”
in
Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted
Intervention–MICCAI 2020: 23rd International Confer-
ence, Lima, Peru, October 4–8, 2020, Proceedings, Part
II 23. Springer, 2020, pp. 667–677.
[5] Jiabo Xu, Saeed Anwar, Nick Barnes, Florian Grimpen,
Olivier Salvado, Stuart Anderson, and Mohammad Ali
Armin,
“Ofgan:
Realistic rendition of synthetic
colonoscopy videos,” in Medical Image Computing and
Computer Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2020: 23rd
International Conference, Lima, Peru, October 4–8,
2020, Proceedings, Part III 23. Springer, 2020, pp. 732–
741.
[6] Minjae Jeong,
Hyuna Cho,
Sungyoon Jung,
and
Won Hwa Kim,
“Uncertainty-aware diffusion-based
adversarial attack for realistic colonoscopy image syn-
thesis,”
in International Conference on Medical Im-
age Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention.
Springer, 2024, pp. 647–658.
[7] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz,
Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer, “High-resolution im-
age synthesis with latent diffusion models,” in Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, 2022, pp. 10684–10695.
[8] Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey
Chu, and Mark Chen,
“Hierarchical text-conditional
image generation with clip latents,”
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.06125, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 3, 2022.
[9] David V´azquez, Jorge Bernal, F Javier S´anchez, Glo-
ria Fern´andez-Esparrach, Antonio M L´opez, Adri-
ana Romero, Michal Drozdzal, and Aaron Courville,
“A benchmark for endoluminal scene segmentation of
colonoscopy images,” Journal of healthcare engineer-
ing, vol. 2017, no. 1, pp. 4037190, 2017.
[10] Jorge Bernal, F Javier S´anchez, Gloria Fern´andez-
Esparrach, Debora Gil, Cristina Rodr´ıguez, and Fer-
nando Vilari˜no,
“Wm-dova maps for accurate polyp
highlighting in colonoscopy:
Validation vs. saliency
maps from physicians,” Computerized medical imaging
and graphics, vol. 43, pp. 99–111, 2015.
[11] Debesh Jha, Pia H Smedsrud, Michael A Riegler, P˚al
Halvorsen, Thomas De Lange, Dag Johansen, and
H˚avard D Johansen, “Kvasir-seg: A segmented polyp
dataset,” in MultiMedia modeling: 26th international
conference, MMM 2020, Daejeon, South Korea, Jan-
uary 5–8, 2020, proceedings, part II 26. Springer, 2020,
pp. 451–462.
[12] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier
Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timoth´ee Lacroix,
Baptiste Rozi`ere, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal
Azhar, et al., “Llama: Open and efficient foundation lan-
guage models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.
[13] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans, “Classifier-free diffu-
sion guidance,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
[14] Shihao Zhao, Dongdong Chen, Yen-Chun Chen, Jian-
min Bao, Shaozhe Hao, Lu Yuan, and Kwan-Yee K
Wong, “Uni-controlnet: All-in-one control to text-to-
image diffusion models,” Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.
[15] Bo Dong, Wenhai Wang, Deng-Ping Fan, Jinpeng Li,
Huazhu Fu, and Ling Shao, “Polyp-pvt: Polyp segmen-
tation with pyramid vision transformers,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.06932, 2021.
