arXiv:2410.22740v1  [cs.HC]  30 Oct 2024
Toward Designing Accessible and Meaningful Sofware for
Cancer Survivors
KYRIE ZHIXUAN ZHOU, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA
ROYTA IFTAKHER, Brooklyn College, City University of New York, USA
SEAN P. MULLEN, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA
RACHEL F. ADLER, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA
DEVORAH KLETENIK, Brooklyn College, City University of New York, USA
Cancer survivors experience a wide range of impairments arising from cancer or its treatment, such as chemo
brain, visual impairments, and physical impairments. These impairments degrade their quality of life and
potentially make software use more challenging for them. However, there has been limited research on de-
signing accessible software for cancer survivors. To bridge this research gap, we conducted a formative study
including a survey (n=46), semi-structured interviews (n=20), and a diary study (n=10) with cancer survivors.
Our results revealed a wide range of impairments experienced by cancer survivors, including chemo brain,
neuropathy, and visual impairments. Cancer survivors heavily relied on software for socialization, health
purposes, and cancer advocacy, but their impairments made software use more challenging for them. Based
on the results, we oﬀer a set of accessibility guidelines that software designers can utilize when creating
applications for cancer survivors. Further, we suggest design features for inclusion, such as health resources,
socialization tools, and games, tailored to the needs of cancer survivors. This research aims to spotlight cancer
survivors’ software accessibility challenges and software needs and invite more research in this important
yet under-investigated domain.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing →Empirical studies in accessibility; Empirical studies
in HCI.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Cancer Survivor, Software, Accessibility, Design Features
1
INTRODUCTION
By January 2022, there were more than 18 million cancer survivors1 in the United States, repre-
senting approximately 5.4% of the population [22]. Cancer survivors may have impairments that
impact their processing of information, including visual [14], hearing [14], physical/motor [24],
and cognitive [30] impairments, as a result of cancer or its treatments. For example, “chemo brain”
(a.k.a. chemo fog) is a common cognitive impairment faced by cancer survivors, accompanied by
memory problems and a lack of mental sharpness [30]. According to the Institute of Medicine and
National Research Council of the National Academies, around 40% of cancer survivors experience
some form of impairment [32], which has a signiﬁcant impact on their Quality of Life (QoL) and
potentially makes software use challenging for this population.
While there is a focus on software accessibility in general and a speciﬁc focus on software acces-
sibility for older adults [4, 15, 16], there is limited attention given speciﬁcally to cancer survivors
with impairments. Recently, cancer survivors were included in participatory design sessions of
1We follow the convention of the American Cancer Society in using the term “cancer survivors” to “refer to any-
one who has ever been diagnosed with cancer no matter where they are in the course of their disease.” See
https://www.cancer.org/treatment/survivorship-during-and-after-treatment.html.
Authors’ addresses: Kyrie Zhixuan Zhou, zz78@illinois.edu, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois,
USA; Royta Iftakher, royta.iftakher65@bcmail.cuny.edu, Brooklyn College, City University of New York, New York, New
York, USA; Sean P. Mullen, spmullen@illinois.edu, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois, USA;
Rachel F. Adler, radler@illinois.edu, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois, USA; Devorah Kletenik,
kletenik@sci.brooklyn.cuny.edu, Brooklyn College, City University of New York, New York, New York, USA.
2
Kyrie Zhixuan Zhou, Royta B. Ifakher, Sean P. Mullen, Rachel F. Adler, and Devorah Kletenik
mobile health (mHealth) applications, allowing small groups of cancer survivors to co-design ac-
cessible prototypes [3]. However, the eﬀects of such a workshop are limited to the design of a
speciﬁc app. To extend the results to impact all types of software, designers of every website and
application would need to consult with cancer survivors, which is not feasible and does not scale
well.
Therefore, we aimed to consider the best approaches in software design for cancer survivors
with impairments by spotlighting cancer survivors and their accessibility needs. This will allow
software designers to focus on this demographic of users even if they cannot recruit members
of this demographic as part of the design process. Through a formative study involving a survey,
in-depth interviews, and a diary study, we derived a set of accessibility guidelines that software
designers can adopt in their design. This allowed us to suggest optimal ways to design websites
and applications that cancer survivors can easily use despite the impairments they face as a result
of cancer or its treatment. Our probe of cancer survivors’ accessibility challenges went beyond
software barriers and concerned other aspects of life, such as health, socialization, and cancer
rehabilitation – factors that can contribute to cancer survivors’ QoL. The elicited design features
can be implemented in future applications designed for this population.
Through the current study, we answered the following research questions (RQs):
• RQ1: What are the challenges and needs of cancer survivors with impairments when using
software?
• RQ2 What are cancer survivors’ needs regarding health, socialization, and cancer rehabil-
itation?
• RQ3: What accessibility guidelines and design features should be formulated for software
design for cancer survivors with impairments?
2
RELATED WORK
We discuss cancer-related impairments, including chemo brain, and their impacts on cancer sur-
vivors’ QoL; and software accessibility for cancer survivors.
2.1
CSCW Technologies for Cancer Survivors
There is a growing body of literature on cancer survivors’ technology use to support cancer man-
agement and treatment. mHealth websites and apps tailored for cancer survivors are a growing
ﬁeld (e.g. [2, 11]).
Accurate health information is essential for cancer treatment. Personalized, up-to-date, and
trusted health information is vital for cancer patients to learn about and manage their condition
[18]. Research suggests that technology may help patients share information with providers, de-
spite their hesitation to share emotions such as loneliness [19].
Collaboration plays a huge role in managing and treating cancer [33]. Jacobs et al. illustrated
collaboration and technology’s roles in supporting navigation work by describing a rural cancer
navigation organization that helped patients overcome emotional, ﬁnancial, and logistical chal-
lenges [17]. CSCW technologies have been used to support family care coordination across cancer
patients’ illness journey, which helped reduce stress levels and improve connectedness [25]. Online
peer support improves psychosocial well-being in terms of anxiety and stress [5]. Online spaces
may be helpful for young adult cancer survivors to collaborate toward reducing isolation, coping
with the fear of mortality, and managing their changing body image and identity [13]. At the same
time, boundary management with caregivers is important for cancer survivors, especially when
transitioning to adulthood as a cancer survivor [1].
Toward Designing Accessible and Meaningful Sofware for Cancer Survivors
3
One notable gap in the computing cancer survivorship literature is that too little is known about
designing accessible software for cancer survivors despite the prevalence of impairments experi-
enced by this population. In fact, one signiﬁcant area where impairments manifest is technology
and software use. Visual impairments can make it diﬃcult to see images and read text; physical
impairments can make it diﬃcult to control mouse movement or to select items on an interface
with precision; and cognitive impairments can make it diﬃcult to comprehend densely written
text or confusing instructions.
Researchers in accessibility have focused on older adults as a category of people with disabili-
ties since they share many common impairments [4, 15, 16]. Cancer survivors with impairments
similarly need accessible software design, which has not been studied in literature so far to the
best of our knowledge. We argue that research should be conducted on cancer survivors to iden-
tify common accessibility needs and accommodations that this population requires so that the
next-generation health-related or general-use software can be designed for ease of use by this
population.
2.2
Cancer-related Impairments
Cancer survivors face impairments that can have a substantial eﬀect on their QoL. These impair-
ments are “physical and functional diﬃculties that do not always resolve with the conclusion
of treatment or that become problematic in survivors earlier than expected with normal aging”
[31]. Cancer survivors may experience impairments caused by the cancer itself or by the treat-
ment, including chemotherapy, radiation, and surgery. For example, they may experience cogni-
tive impairments, including chemo brain [21]; physical, muscular, or motor impairments, including
chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy [24]; visual impairments, sometimes as a result of
tumors in the central nervous system or chemotherapy [12, 14, 29]; and auditory impairments, as
a result of tumors or chemotherapy [14, 29].
Cancer-related impairments impact many people, for a long time, and to a great extent. The
number of aﬀected people is large – an estimated 40% of cancer survivors in the United States
experience a form of impairment [10, 31]. The rate of impairments is frequently underreported:
“Functional problems are prevalent among outpatients with cancer and are rarely documented by
oncology clinicians” [9]. The eﬀect is long-lasting – cancer-related impairments can arise at any
point along the course of cancer diagnosis and treatment or in the years thereafter. Acute toxicities
may arise during and immediately post-treatment, long-term eﬀects can persist for years after can-
cer diagnosis and treatment, and late eﬀects may arise long after the completion of treatment [23].
One study found that over 60% of breast cancer survivors continued to experience impairments
six years after diagnosis [27]. Additionally, cancer-related impairments have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on
survivors’ QoL. One study found that the risk of psychological distress has more to do with the
level of disability than cancer itself [6].
Although the bulk of cancer research concerns the medical needs of cancer survivors, research
into aspects that aﬀect their QoL is also vital. As Stein et al. wrote, “Initial eﬀorts to address the
needs of long-term cancer survivors focused on causes of late mortality and medical late eﬀects,
such as recurrences, second cancers, and cardiopulmonary risks.” More recently, research has be-
gun to document physical and functional diﬃculties due to the realization that “long-term and
late eﬀects of cancer can have a negative eﬀect on cancer survivors’ quality of life” [31]. There is
a great need to formulate a set of accessibility guidelines and design features that help software
designers create applications that can be easily used by cancer survivors and that are purposefully
designed to meaningfully impact their lives, and thus improve their QoL.
4
Kyrie Zhixuan Zhou, Royta B. Ifakher, Sean P. Mullen, Rachel F. Adler, and Devorah Kletenik
2.3
Chemo Brain and Sofware Accessibility
Chemo brain is a form of cognitive impairment that often arises after chemotherapy treatment
of cancer. Chemo brain can lead to weakened cognitive abilities, slower information processing,
longer reaction time, and weakened organizational skills. Cognitively, chemo brain negatively af-
fects language ability, memory, concentration, and attention [30]. Estimating the prevalence of
chemo brain is diﬃcult, but prior research reports a range from about 19% to 78% [34], and its
eﬀects can persist for many years post-treatment [28].
As cancer incidence increases, as well as survival rates for many cancers, the adverse cognitive
eﬀects of chemotherapy and the resultant impact on the QoL of cancer survivors are increasingly
an area of concern [26]. Although chemo brain has received a fair deal of attention in the medical
world, with the goals of diagnosis and possible prevention and treatment, it has received insuﬃ-
cient attention in other domains, where adaptations can be made to improve the functional skills
of cancer survivors aﬀected by chemo brain.
There is recent attention to the challenges that neurodivergent users may face when using in-
accessible software – e.g. users with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) may be dis-
tracted by extraneous content; users with dyslexia may be challenged by textual content [20];
and users with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) may be overwhelmed by complex or time-limited
tasks [7]. All of the above, along with other diﬃculties, may apply to cancer survivors with chemo
brain. Therefore, a major goal of our paper is to introduce to the computing community the eﬀects
of chemo brain on software use and to promote accessible software design for cancer survivors
with chemo brain.
3
METHODOLOGY
Our IRB-approved study included a survey, semi-structured interviews, and a diary study, lasting
from November 2023 to July 2024. Survey respondents who provided detailed, insightful responses
were invited to an interview; willing interviewees further submitted software diaries over the
course of one week. Below, we elaborate on each component of this study.
3.1
Survey
Following a consent process, the survey starts by asking for demographic information and infor-
mation related to cancer and its treatments, e.g., the type and stage of cancer the respondent was
diagnosed with, the current stage of cancer, and types of treatment. Next, we ask if the respondents
experienced any impairments before or after cancer diagnosis and treatment. Participants then an-
swered nine 5-point Likert-scale questions about the frequency of software (e.g., websites, apps)
challenges, including (1) reading text on websites/apps, (2) seeing images/icons on websites/apps,
(3) hearing audio on websites/apps/videos/podcasts, (4) typing, (5) manipulating or selecting (e.g.,
scrolling, zooming, clicking on buttons) on websites/apps, (6) following the instructions on web-
sites/apps, (7) navigating on websites/apps (e.g., ﬁnding the correct option or page), (8) focusing
while using websites/apps, and (9) feeling frustrated or annoyed. We further asked open-ended
questions such as descriptions of the diﬃculties faced while using websites or apps, features of
website/app design that make the use easier or more challenging, strategies/technologies/tools
used to mitigate the eﬀects of the impairments on software use, and whether they consider the
impairments as a result of cancer or its treatment to be a “disability.” The survey concludes by
asking if the respondents want to participate in the follow-up interview. We told respondents the
survey would take approximately 20 minutes of their time. The survey is attached in Section A.1
in the Appendix.
Toward Designing Accessible and Meaningful Sofware for Cancer Survivors
5
We distributed the survey via various channels, such as one cancer research advocacy group,
one cancer research center, closed Facebook groups of cancer survivors, Twitter, Mechanical Turk,
and through distribution channels of healthcare professionals (e.g. ﬂyers on hospital walls). We re-
ceived 1,076 responses; however, we found that the majority of survey responses obtained through
mass recruitment (Mechanical Turk, Twitter, and even the closed Facebook groups) were gener-
ated by bots, evidenced by (1) one person ﬁlling in multiple surveys, (2) response that indicated
seeing the survey in a platform where it had not been distributed, and (3) ChatGPT-styled open-
ended responses that were generalizable or situational rather than individualized. Smaller scale
recruitment (through cancer centers, advocacy groups, and hospitals) yielded far fewer responses,
but responses that were legitimate. A total of 46 legit responses were used for analysis. We com-
pensated the legit respondents with $10.
3.2
Interview
To better understand cancer survivors’ accessibility challenges and life needs, we conducted a
follow-up interview study with survey respondents who had impairments because of cancer that
contributed to their software challenges and who provided insightful responses. The interview
covered topics similar to those in the survey in a more in-depth fashion. We asked the partici-
pants about the impairment(s) they faced as a result of cancer and its treatment, types of software
they used, challenges they faced while using the software as a result of the impairments, possible
solutions to the challenges faced, assistive technologies used, and manual help leveraged. These
questions may help inform accessibility guidelines for cancer survivors with impairments. We also
asked about the daily life aspects of cancer survivors, such as exercise and social life, and how these
activities and interactions were aﬀected after their cancer diagnosis. These questions were used to
synthesize design features. The interview protocol is attached in Section A.2 in the Appendix. The
interviews lasted about an hour over Zoom, and each interviewee received $25 as compensation.
The interviews were recorded upon consent for transcription and analysis. The 20 interviewees’
demographic information is summarized in Table 1.
Table 1. Demographic information of cancer survivor interviewees.
ID
Gender
Age
Race
Highest level of education
Type(s) of cancer
Stage of cancer ﬁrst diagnosed with
Current stage of cancer
Type(s) of treatment
P1
Male
85
White
Graduate degree
Colorectal
Stage 1
Unknown
Surgery, Radiation, Chemotherapy
P2
Female
69
White
4-year college degree
Ovarian
Stage 1
No evidence of disease
Surgery, Chemotherapy
P3
Female
63
White
4-year college degree
Myeloma
Stage 2
Complete remission
Chemotherapy, Immunotherapy
P4
Female
68
White
4-year college degree
Breast
Stage 2
No evidence of disease
Surgery, Radiation, Chemotherapy, Estrogen suppression therapy
P5
Female
42
White
Doctoral degree or equivalent
Leukemia
Not sure
Complete remission
Surgery, Radiation, Chemotherapy, Bone Marrow Transplant
P6
Female
40
White
Graduate degree
Breast
Stage 3
No evidence of disease
Surgery, Radiation, Chemotherapy, Hormonal treatment
P7
Female
60
White
Graduate degree
Breast, Colorectal
Stage 1
No evidence of disease
Surgery, Chemotherapy, Hormonal treatment
P8
Female
54
White
Graduate degree
Colorectal
Stage 3
Complete remission
Surgery, Radiation, Chemotherapy
P9
Male
23
White
4-year college degree
Brain, Thyroid
Stage 2
No evidence of disease
Surgery, Chemotherapy
P10
Female
35
White
4-year college degree
Breast
Stage 1
Complete remission
Surgery, Chemotherapy
P11
Male
24
Black
2-year college degree
Brain
Stage 1
No evidence of disease
Chemotherapy
P12
Female
24
Black
2-year college degree
Breast
Stage 2
Progressed to stage 3
Chemotherapy
P13
Female
25
Black
2-year college degree
Kidney
Stage 2
Progressed to stage 3
Surgery
P14
Male
34
Black
Graduate degree
Lung
Stage 2
No evidence of disease
Chemotherapy
P15
Female
27
Black
4-year college degree
Breast
Stage 2
Complete remission
Chemotherapy
P16
Male
26
Black
4-year college degree
Prostate
Stage 2
Stage 3
Surgery, Radiation, Chemotherapy
P17
Male
28
Black
Graduate degree
Eye, Pancreatic, Prostate
Stage 2
Stage 2
Chemotherapy, Hormonal treatment
P18
Female
28
Black
Graduate degree
Breast
Stage 2
Partial remission
Chemotherapy
P19
Female
48
Creóle
4-year college degree
Breast, Liver
Stage 4
Stage 4
Surgery, Radiation, Chemotherapy
P20
Male
28
Black
Doctoral degree
Eye, Ovarian, Prostate
Stage 2
Partial remission
Radiation, Hormonal treatment
3.3
Diary
The interview participants who were interested in the diary study were asked to keep a diary of
software (e.g. websites, apps, computer programs) used and any challenges and accessibility issues
6
Kyrie Zhixuan Zhou, Royta B. Ifakher, Sean P. Mullen, Rachel F. Adler, and Devorah Kletenik
found while using software over the course of one week. Participants who opted to keep a software
diary were provided with the template table that had ﬁve columns: (1) Date and time, (2) Device
used (e.g., desktop computer, laptop computer, mobile phone, ebook reader, etc.), (3) Name of soft-
ware, app, or website (if website please also list the browser used – e.g., “Website: abc.com, Browser:
Chrome”), (4) Accessibility issue noticed: What was challenging/diﬃcult/impossible about the soft-
ware interaction? If you have any ideas for solutions, please list them as well, and (5) Any informa-
tion that would have been helpful but was not included. The participants were compensated $10
for the diary study with one $5 bonus if the diary contained at least 7 events (quantity of entries)
and another $5 bonus for the quality of entries. They were encouraged to make multiple entries
during that week.
Ten interview participants opted for the diary study, and nine encountered software accessibility
challenges from cancer-induced impairments during the diary period.
3.4
Analysis
We reported descriptive statistics for survey responses, such as the number/percentage of respon-
dents with each type of impairment and the number/percentage of respondents with each type
of software challenge. We similarly counted how many participants reported software challenges
associated with each impairment in the diary study and used their notes taken as examples. For
open-ended survey responses, interviews, and diary entries, we adopted a thematic analysis ap-
proach [8] to analyze the data. We ﬁrst conducted an open coding of the data to have a general
understanding, then went in-depth, extracting emerging themes and subthemes and organizing
them into a hierarchical structure. Emerging themes included cancer-induced impairments, soft-
ware challenges, and cancer survivors’ life needs. Under cancer survivors’ life needs, for example,
we had subthemes, including cancer advocacy, socialization, and health. We reached a consensus
within the team regarding the themes and subthemes. This paper used anonymized quotes to re-
port the qualitative results.
4
RESULTS
4.1
Survey Results
Of the 46 survey responses, 16 (34.8%) came from male cancer survivors, and 29 (63.0%) came from
female cancer survivors. The respondents averaged 42 years old and were mostly White (N=28,
60.9%) and Black (N=15, 32.6%). They had a relatively high level of education, with 42 (91.3%)
having a college degree or above. Eighteen (39.1%) of them indicated “no evidence of disease” and
11 (23.9%) indicated “complete remission” at the time of the study. Chemotherapy was the most
common treatment (N=34, 73.9%), followed by surgery (N=25, 54.3%) and radiation (N=18, 39.1%).
4.1.1
Cancer-induced Impairments. After their cancer diagnosis and treatment, 24 respondents
(52.2%) newly developed anxiety/depression, 22 (47.8%) developed fatigue, 15 (32.6%) developed
cognitive diﬃculties, including chemo brain, 14 (30.4%) developed physical/motor/dexterity im-
pairments, and 7 (15.2%) developed visual impairments. Fatigue (e.g., “I don’t schedule things in
the evening”) and anxiety/depression (e.g., “I was depressed because of body changes and new
look.”) are common side eﬀects of cancer or its treatment. Chemo brain could lead to forgetfulness,
e.g., “inability to remember where I put things (keys, purse, phone, etc.)”; trouble concentrating
and shortened attention span, e.g., “lack of focus”; diﬃculty “ﬁnding the correct word to use”; dif-
ﬁculty learning, e.g., “hard to grasp concepts quickly”; or lack of brain sharpness in general, e.g.,
“slowing of thought process and inability to multitask and diﬃculty with memory and easily over-
whelmed.” This respondent vividly pictured what a chemo brain was like, “Cognitive fog is like
having a big cloud in your mind that makes it diﬃcult to think clearly.”
Toward Designing Accessible and Meaningful Sofware for Cancer Survivors
7
Forty-one (89.1%) respondents developed at least one new impairment after cancer, while nine-
teen (41.3%) respondents reported at least one ongoing impairment at the time of the study. These
two respondents were examples whose cognitive impairments have lasted till now, “I had the worst
of the chemo brain (brain fog, inability to retrieve words, and lack of focus) for less than two years,
however, I believe chemo or hormone treatments have left me with ongoing cognitive issues, particu-
larly lack of focus.” “Most eﬀects lessened but I would say that my attention span is much less and my
ability to focus and my memory has been permanently aﬀected.”
The respondents expressed frustration about the impairments and their impacts on daily life.
This quote illustrates how one cancer survivor experienced diﬃculty remembering people’s names,
which she used to be good at, due to chemo brain, “I couldn’t remember names when introduced
to someone new. I had always prided myself on remembering someone’s name when introduced and
to not have that ability felt abnormal, as though I’d done something wrong and was somehow lesser.
I tried multiple ways to help my memory (using their name when talking to them, writing it down,
etc.) but nothing seemed to work. I now just tell them I can’t remember their name and reintroduce
myself. The lack of accurate recall lasts until this day.”
The respondents also mentioned their coping strategies with the impairments. For example,
this respondent often found herself struggling to ﬁnd the correct words when speaking or writing
and would use a variety of strategies to mitigate this issue, such as Googling words or leaving a
placeholder and revisiting the word choice later, “When writing, I would often put a dash in the
middle of my sentences, where I knew “what" I wanted to convey/say but I couldn’t quite come up
with the proper term. I would ﬁnish the thought as best I could with that gap, and return to ﬁll it in
later when the word/phrase ﬁnally came to me. Often I would have to Google other words to ﬁnd the
word I needed. While this happens less frequently now, there are still times I struggle with cognitive
issues related to communication and focus.”
4.1.2
Sofware Challenges. Software challenges arose from the cancer-related impairments, i.e.,
being distracted or having a hard time focusing while using websites/apps (N=25, 54.3%), be-
ing frustrated or annoyed while using software (N=22, 51.2%), having diﬃculty reading text on
websites/apps (N=21, 45.7%), having diﬃculty following the instructions on websites/apps (N=18,
39.1%), having diﬃculty seeing images/icons on websites/apps (N=16, 34.8%), ﬁnding navigating
on websites/apps (e.g., ﬁnding the correct option or page) to be diﬃcult or confusing (N=17, 37.0%),
having diﬃculty typing (N=14, 30.4%), having diﬃculty manipulating or selecting (e.g., scrolling,
zooming, clicking on buttons) on websites/apps (N=10, 21.7%), and having diﬃculty hearing audio
on websites/apps/videos/podcasts (N=9, 19.6%).
Respondents expressed strategies to mitigate the software challenges and preferred design ac-
commodations. Cancer survivors with visual impairments favored high contrast, big font, and
zooming functionality. Participants with a chemo brain had diﬃculty focusing on content and had
to read instructions multiple times to comprehend them. Remembering multiple instructions si-
multaneously was particularly diﬃcult for some. Besides using tools like Pomodoro apps or ad
blockers to help them focus, “bulleted instructions, pictures/icons, more visuals, clear and simple
instructions, shortlisted options, and simpliﬁed design” helped their comprehension of instructions
and websites. Easy downloads and account openings were favored by those with chemo brain who
were “sick of dealing with apps.” “Autoﬁll is priceless” for those with chemo brain who had dif-
ﬁculty coming up with words. Overall, participants condemned websites and apps for their bad
designs, including lengthy instructions, too much information, password management, complex
interfaces, and too many options. In a contrasting sentiment, simplicity, autoﬁll, voice input, bul-
leted instructions, pictures/icons, and calendars/alerts were helpful software features for cancer
survivors with chemo brain.
8
Kyrie Zhixuan Zhou, Royta B. Ifakher, Sean P. Mullen, Rachel F. Adler, and Devorah Kletenik
People diverged in their opinions of whether the impairments count as disabilities. Of the forty-
one respondents who developed at least one new impairment after cancer, seventeen (41.5%) of
them viewed impairments as disabilities given the inconvenience they brought, “YES, particularly
cognitive impairments make it impossible for me to return to normal activities.” “I didn’t at the time,
probably as a defense mechanism. But looking back on it, it was absolutely a disability, a pretty serious
impairment that impacted my work and life.” Others did not see impairments as disabilities since
they could overcome them with eﬀorts and strategies, “No, because I was able to compensate for the
deﬁcits.” “No, I look at it as a challenge to overcome or adapt to.” Some of them thought impairments
were not as severe or enduring as disabilities, “No, I don’t view my cognitive issues or ongoing side
eﬀects as a disability. I personally consider my experiences as an impairment or limitations; they are
eﬀects that I live with and can work around. Personally, I believe a disability is much more severe and
prevents a desired outcome.” “It’s not a disability since the impairments only lasted for some time.”
4.2
Interview Results
“Cancer doctors make no promises about post-cancer eﬀects (P7)”, and people only realize the
impairments after experiencing them. Due to these impairments, fatigue, or depression, cancer
survivors’ QoL is signiﬁcantly aﬀected. P1 described how he sat and stared at the wall for hours or
slept all day. Everything he was accustomed to doing, including exercise (hiking and swimming),
was now impossible. He said that he just had no energy and no motivation. His phone use oﬀered
a way to break the monotony, because it provided a relatively low-eﬀort way to connect to the
outside world; for example, it was easier for him to read brief news clips on his phone than an
article in a newspaper. However, since his energy and motivation were so low, the software needed
to be both motivating and easy to use, or he will give up. Overall, software oﬀers to be a lifeline
for cancer survivors, but it has to be carefully designed to achieve that aim. Other interviewees
similarly reported various life challenges and software challenges arising from cancer-induced
impairments, especially chemo brain. They also expressed life needs in the process of recovery and
rehabilitation, including socialization, health, and cancer advocacy. These are valuable insights for
software designers to design products accommodating cancer survivors’ accessibility needs and
life needs.
4.2.1
Chemo Brain. Chemo brain was a frequently mentioned impairment by our interview partic-
ipants. Out of eighteen cancer survivors who used chemotherapy as a means of treatment, thirteen
of them had or were experiencing chemo brain at the time of the study. P1 could not concentrate
and had poor memory. P3 also indicated short-term memory issues – when she shifted between
multiple tabs in the browser, she sometimes forgot what she wanted to look at. P11’s memory issue
led him to forget passwords, and he often had to register for new accounts. He found computers
particularly challenging since he tended to forget key locations on the keyboard. P2 similarly ex-
perienced bad memory and a lack of focus (during the interview, she said: “something just popped
up in my head”). She typed slowly on her computer and smartphone and occasionally experienced
“episode incidents” when she could not understand words. She disliked this new normal when us-
ing digital devices and in daily life. P8 experienced a shorter attention span due to chemo brain.
She also found it harder to retain knowledge and had to re-read things all the time. Chemo brain
did not aﬀect her work as she was able to “adapt and ﬁnd ways around.” For example, she would
set alarms to remember things when she was in a supervisor role. P6 acknowledged cancer-led
cognitive impairments, including chemo brain, were the scariest part of her cancer journey. At
some point, she was concerned that she may not be able to teach as she could not process things
quickly and put things together. Despite improvement, her brain was still slow in processing things,
Toward Designing Accessible and Meaningful Sofware for Cancer Survivors
9
including websites. P5 did not have chemo brain at the time of the interview but worried about
developing it in the future.
Software is often designed without considering accessibility, making its use more challenging
for cancer survivors with chemo brain. P5 pointed out some medical apps were not designed in
an accessible and user-friendly way and may impact cancer survivors with chemo brain: “The
navigation process in the hospital app is not consistent. Sometimes, I cannot ﬁnd an aﬃliated hospital.
Sometimes, I cannot ﬁnd a digital letter after being alerted by text. They are put in weird places.”
Suboptimal information organization and navigation structures posed signiﬁcant challenges to
people with chemo brain.
Participants suggested approaches to make software more accessible and usable for people with
chemo brain. To help mitigate the eﬀects of chemo brain, P9 thought fonts on websites and apps
should be well-seen, big, and bold; Siri or screen readers helped in understanding the text. Ac-
cording to P11, voice typing helped with chemo brain, especially when he could not spell a word
out. Google Password Manager helped him autoﬁll passwords that he could not remember. P6 sug-
gested websites be made in a simple way and provide information in pieces to ease understanding,
“Websites should help consume as much info as possible. Sometimes, I have to read things multiple
times before understanding them. Simplifying things is important to me, like breaking things up into
small pieces.” At the end of the interview, she again emphasized websites should deliver quality,
helpful information in smaller pieces leveraging bullet points, infographics, and chunks. P14 pre-
ferred watching videos at a slower speed to capture information at an easier pace and also used
subtitles as a secondary way to focus. P10 suggested bold text, more images to help people concen-
trate, colors other than black and white, and highlighting topics using bullet point summary. P11
suggested bold and black text for concentration, using lines instead of italicized text to highlight
important content, using bold colors such as red instead of light colors such as light green, and
using images to accompany the text. Due to diﬃculty typing, he liked video games where he did
not need to type and could use a microphone to communicate with teammates. P1 repeatedly sug-
gested making websites simple (e.g., using short snippets) to reduce cognitive loads, motivating
software like games to give people motivation to use them instead of sleeping, and using a positive
tone to accommodate cancer survivors’ mental status.
All participants with chemo brain indicated playing games to improve their cognition. P2 played
Candy Crush, mindfulness games, and word games like Wordscapes and Word Connect to help
her“concentrate and sharpen focus.” P3 played another word game, Wordle, and other cognitive
games such as puzzles to “put her brain somewhere else [besides her cancer].” Similarly, P10 found
herself playing more games after cancer to keep herself busy. P8 thought games, such as role-
playing games and shooting games, were helpful to her cognitive ability by stimulating her brain.
P11 picked up word games as suggested by the doctor to recover from chemo brain. He played
shooting and sports games less during chemo brain since they were “too complex.” P5 did not
experience chemo brain, but to prevent it, she played three to four games (e.g., crossword, word
search puzzles, strategy games) after waking up to exercise her brain. P7 observed that many
people picked up games during chemotherapy. P14 expressed frustration with attention span and
diﬃculty while playing games. When overcoming a level in a game was diﬃcult, he got bored and
frustrated and even stopped playing. For a person who struggles to muster energy and focus on
a task, having this process interrupted by overly complicated design and a lack of adjustability
regarding gameplay diﬃculty takes away from the already small pool of activities available to
maintain their mental health and livelihood.
4.2.2
Visual Impairments. Some cancer survivors experienced visual impairments. P3 needed glasses
more often than she used to. Small fonts on websites were a struggle for her, so she used a computer
10
Kyrie Zhixuan Zhou, Royta B. Ifakher, Sean P. Mullen, Rachel F. Adler, and Devorah Kletenik
more than a smartphone for a larger screen. P8 experienced worse vision after chemotherapy and
had diﬃculty reading text. She had to make text bigger on her computer but generally found com-
puters easier to use than phones becuase they allow for a larger font. P5 had low vision even before
cancer but was diagnosed with a cataract after cancer treatment. She experienced challenges in
reading text and icons and had to zoom in on screens constantly. When she used smartphones, she
either used her ﬁngers to zoom in or took screenshots and zoomed in the pictures. She complained
about the tiny text in images on social media platforms like Facebook and other websites. She of-
ten asked colleagues to make content larger in screen sharing during meetings. After developing
poorer eyesight because of cancer, P17 stopped playing video games, which used to be an impor-
tant means of entertainment. P19 became more photo-sensitive after cancer and had to close her
eyes when scrolling on digital devices to avoid getting light-headed.
4.2.3
Dexterity Impairments. Some cancer survivors have peripheral neuropathy, which is a unique
condition in the accessibility community. P4’s friend had “fat ﬁngers” when typing, unsure whether
keyboard pressure was suﬃcient, and ended up with typos. P5 similarly found typing hard and
missed letters. She instead used voice-to-text tools such as Siri when using smartphones and cor-
rected grammar if necessary; when using computers, she could not ﬁnd similar accommodations
and could only type slowly and steadily. After cancer, P8 was more sensitive to coldness and found
her “metal laptop is too cold to touch.” She would use ﬁnger gloves for this reason. As a result, she
could not use the trackpad seamlessly and always attached a mouse to her computer.
4.2.4
Multiple Sources of Sofware Challenges. Software challenges can be attributed to both cancer-
and cancer treatment-induced impairments and other non-cancer factors, according to our partic-
ipants. Aging is a commonly cited cause of challenges in software use. For example, P2 said, “I’m
older. If I don’t need it, I don’t do it. I don’t have the capacity to do things I used to do. It’s not [a
problem with] the software.” P1 similarly expressed that older people were not as familiar with
computers in general.
Tech literacy is another important factor. Not all cancer survivors are tech-savvy users. P2 ac-
knowledged herself a mediocre tech user and said her software usage was “as bad as before” after
being diagnosed with cancer. She deemed a library workshop for smartphone use helpful. P7 spent
a long time ﬁguring out the consent form and setting up Zoom before the interview. She would
ask her daughter for help when encountering technical diﬃculties. She paid for extra customer
service for her Dell laptop.
Users found some devices are more accessible than others. For example, P3 preferred computers
over smartphones for bigger text. Similarly, P7 did not like phones since “words are too small for
an old person,” and she wanted a bigger screen.
4.2.5
Cancer Survivors’ Life Needs: Cancer Advocacy. Cancer advocacy requires legislation and so-
cial, ﬁnancial, and informational support for cancer survivors. P1 was engaged in cancer advocacy
and founded a nonproﬁt organization dedicated to educating about the early detection of cancer.
P2 actively worked with the American Cancer Society to advocate legislation and raise funding
for cancer research. She expressed the urgent need for cancer advocacy since “currently there is
no diversity in trials, and people in rural areas and underrepresented groups are not included.” P2
also worked with cancer advocacy groups to organize seminars for cancer survivors and invite
speakers. P4 participated in advocacy groups so that she did not “remain within her own silent
brain.” P5 explained why she wanted to advocate for cancer survivors given her dual roles as a
cancer survivor and a public health scientist, “I’m a diﬀerent cancer survivor. I’m a public health
scientist and a survivor at the same time. So, I really want to put my thoughts out there as an advocate.
I share a lot with people going through treatment. I also join the fundraising walks.”
Toward Designing Accessible and Meaningful Sofware for Cancer Survivors
11
4.2.6
Cancer Survivors’ Life Needs: Socialization. Socialization plays an integral role in enhancing
cancer survivors’ social well-being. Social media and gatherings of cancer survivors are two main
means for them to share information and support. P2 noted survivors wanted to share informa-
tion and were happy at conferences organized for them. P8 participated in online support groups
where people experienced similar challenges, such as chemo brain. By attending a local support
group, she could get help and provide help at the same time. P3 was active on Facebook during
cancer treatment and recently started using Twitter to follow cancer doctors. She thought social
media helped her social life and enabled her to help others, which helped her mental status (“I’m a
helper”). P6 acknowledged using social media a lot during treatment, which helped her meet peo-
ple with similar experiences and share struggles – she got friendship and support in this process.
P2 expressed that social media was essential for her to keep in touch with family and other cancer
survivors. She did not post but felt less isolated by connecting with people with direct messages,
even by just reading people’s messages in her inbox.
Some participants avoided socialization or connecting with new friends for physical constraints,
or to avoid the social stigma attached to the socially-ascribed identity of cancer survivors. P7 was
such an example, who did not want to be reminded of her identity as a cancer patient, “I didn’t
like [being a cancer patient] to be a part of my identity there [on social media]. I only stuck with
people I’ve known for years.” P9 was depressed during cancer treatment and was not in the mood
to hang out with others, even though he knew this isolating behavior was not beneﬁcial. P12
practiced meditation to stimulate focus, which was also a more solitary activity. P8 experienced
severe fatigue and often found herself too tired to socialize, “Fatigue cut that out. I had no energy left
after work but picked it [socialization] up again when energy recovered.” P11 socialized less because
he often found himself “blank out of words to say” due to chemo brain, which he thought was
embarrassing. He only talked to family members and friends who understood his situation. P14
expressed his frustration when he asked friends and family for help and was told the tasks were
“easy.” He was often told, “It’s not rocket science,” which discouraged him from asking for more
assistance and generally increased his tension.
People found their social habits and preferences are evolving. After cancer treatment, P6 has
tried to “cut away from social media to stay connected to the family” and now prefers cancer-
speciﬁc social networks, which are more private. According to her, such social networks should
contain like-minded people gathered by a shared interest in scientiﬁc information and grouped
by subject matter (e.g., cancer vs other topics) and provide quality information, e.g., videos for
exercising or recovering. P13 similarly took a break from social media to spend more time with
family.
4.2.7
Cancer Survivors’ Life Needs: Health. Living a healthy lifestyle is of vital importance to can-
cer survivors. All our participants emphasized the importance of exercise for health, yet some felt
it was diﬃcult to exercise due to cancer-induced fatigue or immune deﬁciency.
More emphasis on health (exercise, nutrition, sleep) is common in our participants after cancer
diagnosis and treatment. P5 acknowledged more regularly exercising after her cancer diagnosis
as she got to know how important it is for health. She used a Fitbit to track her step goals and
sleep patterns, which were intertwined matters for her, “I sleep better after exercise and my fatigue
issue is improved. Using it [Fitbit] encourages me to exercise.” P3 similarly expressed the positive
relationship between exercise and energy. P6 thought she was healthier than before by exercising
a lot after her cancer diagnosis, as health has become her priority. She had an exercise mentor to
keep her on track. The mentor prepared courses, videos, and handouts for mentees. P7 tried chair
exercises to relieve her sciatica, which “kicked in after cancer treatment.”
12
Kyrie Zhixuan Zhou, Royta B. Ifakher, Sean P. Mullen, Rachel F. Adler, and Devorah Kletenik
Some participants experienced more diﬃculty exercising. P10 exercised less because of physical
pain after cancer. P8 had intense chemo reactions, and it took her a couple of years before regaining
energy. P11 stopped intensive sports such as football after cancer but generally exercised more to
keep in shape. P1, who was interviewed shortly after a complete course of radiation, reported that
he had no energy for the exercise (such as swimming and hiking) that he used to engage in.
Our participants used technology and strategies to facilitate exercise, such as apps for step-
counting and calorie-counting. P6 liked checklists for the dopamine-driven eﬀect, which motivated
her to make progress on small goals. P8 used a water intake app, a sleep tracking app, and a
medication app. However, when it came to her severe anxiety regarding cancer, she did not think
a medication app was helpful; she would use self-soothing or talk to her oncologist to relieve
anxiety.
Cancer survivors have a powerful need to seek health-related information. To some, learn-
ing about cancer/medicine research empowered them. P7 thought positive information, such as
progress in cancer research, made cancer patients hopeful. She did not want negative information
from online sources and speakers at events; “just let people look at cool or positive stuﬀ.” P17 ac-
tively sought health information and recommendations from doctors/clinics on social media, Mayo
Clinic, Google, Bloomberg, and other sources. Exercise tips are needed by those with immune de-
ﬁciency or bone issues. P3 has not gone to gyms since being diagnosed with myeloma, as she had
a suppressed immune system and had bone issues. She thought safe exercise tips were helpful to
protect her spine during exercise. P6 expressed concerns with the quality of information online.
She thought social features such as message boards were helpful for people to share general infor-
mation and experiences, but when it came to cancer-related questions, dedicated boards should be
used where questions were only answered by medical professionals.
4.3
Diary Results
In the diary period, the participants experienced software accessibility challenges due to hearing,
physical, and visual impairments, chemo brain, and cancer treatment.
One participant reported experiencing limited access to software due to cancer treatment. P3
noted, “I recently had surgery, so access to my main computer was/is limited.” She, therefore, further
suggested an app that could “easily link all devices.”
One participant experienced software challenges due to hearing impairments. When P15 used
YouTube on her mobile phone, she had diﬃculty hearing audio. She suggested potential solutions
such as adding subtitles, “I’d love to get assistive listening devices because I think this would help.
Also, there should be more options for volume enhancement.”
Two participants experienced software challenges due to physical impairments. P13 had dif-
ﬁculty adjusting brightness due to physical dexterity issues when using the Kindle app on the
laptop. She suggested voice-activated controls for adjusting brightness and instructions on using
voice commands to adjust settings. P15 had diﬃculty typing and using a mouse when Googling on
the laptop. She suggested using a pen to control the cursor and making sound recorders available
to transform audio into text. She also had diﬃculty controlling in-game actions on the laptop and
would like programs that allowed for voice commands to control gameplay. She stressed the im-
portance of accessibility thinking for app developers, which is vital to cancer survivors, “I would
suggest that software and app developers should have cervical cancer survivors and other cancer sur-
vivors in mind while developing apps. They should make it easy for us to have access to the features we
need and make available text expanders, screen readers or mouse alternatives. When we experience
diﬃculties which weren’t there prior to our cancer journey, it makes us become sad, depressed and
avoid technology.”
Toward Designing Accessible and Meaningful Sofware for Cancer Survivors
13
Eight participants had diﬃculty with software because of visual impairments. The small font
size was a pain for P3, P8, P11, P12, P13, P14, P15, and P16. For example, P3 said, “Very blurry, I
always need my glasses and if they are not in reach, I cannot read. A larger font would be helpful.” In
addition to larger fonts, P11 suggested the “incorporation of zooming gestures such as using two
ﬁngers to zoom in and out of the screen.” P13 similarly suggested a “quick-access button for text
size adjustments.” P15 additionally suggested text-to-speech to compensate for small fonts. Small
fonts may further lead to ﬁnancial risks. P16 documented how he lost money when interacting
with blockchain, “I recently had my wallet drained perhaps I clicked on a wrong thing due to the
font size.” Color and color contrast between text and background caused struggles for P8, P11,
P15, and P16. For instance, when P11 read novels on his mobile phone, he struggled with light
yellow writing and had to put his phone on dark screen mode to make brightly colored texts
more outstanding from the background. When using Instagram on a mobile phone, P13 found
distinguishing between similar icons challenging due to visual impairment from cancer treatment.
She suggested more distinctive icon designs and text labels for icons, as well as a high contrast
mode to make icons more distinguishable.
Five participants encountered challenges due to chemo brain. Memory issues made software
use more challenging for P3, P8, and P13. P3 suggested reminder apps to help people with brain
fog, “I just looked at a saved document on my desktop and realized I totally forgot about this journal...
SO some kind of app to remind people of things or to help with brain fog!?” P8 had poor short-term
memory, which made it diﬃcult for her to go through multiple steps in apps. When using Microsoft
Word on the laptop, P13 experienced diﬃculty remembering where tools are located due to chemo
brain and suggested a simpliﬁed toolbar layout and customizable shortcuts for frequently used
tools. She also had diﬃculty remembering how to navigate to privacy settings in Facebook on her
mobile phone. She suggested a more intuitive, step-by-step guide for ﬁnding settings or a help
feature with voice commands to guide navigation. She found diﬃculty ﬁnding and using the mute
button during Zoom calls due to cognitive delays, and she suggested a larger, more prominent
mute button and a voice command option to mute/unmute or an audio reminder about mute status
when joining a call. She struggled with complex formulas when using Excel due to cognitive fog
with treatment, and would like simpliﬁed formula wizards and video tutorials. P8, P11, and P16
experienced a lack of focus when interacting with apps. P11 experienced a lack of focus and a
“cloudy mind” when playing video games, especially driving simulation games. P8 lacked focus
when selecting from multiple options, “Poor focus makes this irritating; I either ignore or slowly
focus on each option.” She had learned to compensate by calming herself down and re-focusing.
P16 found it more diﬃcult to focus when “there’s too much going on in the app at once.”
5
DISCUSSION
Cancer survivors often ﬁnd themselves living with impairments as side eﬀects of cancer or its treat-
ment, including chemo brain, visual impairments, and neuropathy/dexterity impairments. These
impairments signiﬁcantly impact their QoL and software experiences. In this work, we begin a con-
versation around the software accessibility needs of this population, extending the prior CSCW
literature on using technology to facilitate collaboration [33] and health information seeking [18]
for cancer survivors. Through a formative study with interviews, a survey, and a diary study, we
spotlight this population’s impairments and software challenges, which have rarely been discussed
in the CSCW and computer accessibility literature.
5.1
Cancer Survivors’ Sofware Accessibility Challenges and Needs
Cancer-induced impairments such as chemo brain [21] and visual impairments [12] have been
reported in the literature. Our ﬁndings echoed the long-lasting nature of these impairments [23].
14
Kyrie Zhixuan Zhou, Royta B. Ifakher, Sean P. Mullen, Rachel F. Adler, and Devorah Kletenik
Impairments lead to more psychological distress than cancer itself [6] and signiﬁcantly impact
cancer survivors’ QoL. We spotlighted the software accessibility challenges and needs of cancer
survivors with impairments, which is an under-investigated aspect of cancer survivors’ QoL.
While software challenges posed by visual and physical impairments have been well-documented,
peripheral neuropathy, as well as “chemo brain” – a condition speciﬁc to cancer survivors – presents
unique diﬃculties. Our participants reported issues like shortened attention spans, diminished fo-
cus, and trouble with word retrieval, which complicates their use of software. For example, they
found large chunks of text on websites overwhelming, whereas bullet points and images eased
their reading. Cancer survivors’ perceptions of the newly developed impairments and how such
perceptions impact behavior are under-investigated. Individuals with chemo brain may not have
expected or accepted this side eﬀect of treatment. They may feel less in control of their situation
as this is not normal age-related progression. Practically, chemo brain impacts word search and
aﬀective states, and ultimately inﬂuences the nature of human-computer interactions and how
much time cancer survivors want to spend on digital devices, which are often important for their
well-being.
The accessibility needs of older adults have been extensively studied in the accessibility litera-
ture due to common impairments shared by this population [4, 15, 16]. We advocate for a similar
depth of research into software accessibility for cancer survivors to ensure that accommodations
meet their speciﬁc needs, for several reasons. First, cancer survivors need software for a wide
range of purposes, such as mental well-being and socialization, but their multiple cancer-induced
impairments necessitate accessible software. Second, cancer survivors are a unique set of individu-
als who are facing as of recent many disabilities they have not had before, and this combination of
disabilities is unique. Around 40% of the survey respondents who newly developed impairments
after cancer saw cancer-induced impairments as disabilities, given the inconvenience they brought.
While others may have experienced lingering eﬀects of cancer and its treatment, as discussed in
prior research, some cancer survivors may not self-identify as having a disability [2]. Therefore,
it is important for software designers to understand that cancer survivors experience these di-
verse impairments. Third, chemo brain is an impairment unique to cancer survivors, necessitating
dedicated research in the computing and accessibility literature.
While our research provides a set of guidelines for software designers, it is important to note
that our results also showed that when possible co-design and user-centered design should be em-
phasized. Otherwise, the software would frustrate cancer survivors with impairments, according
to some participants. Designers of software for cancer survivors should therefore: (1) co-design
with cancer survivors by including them in the desing process, if resources and time permit; (2)
make software accessibility a priority; and (3) think about strategies cancer survivors may like,
such as gamiﬁcation. We will elaborate more concrete strategies in the following subsection.
5.2
Accessibility Guidelines and Design Features
Based on our ﬁndings, we elicited accessibility guidelines and design features for cancer survivors
with impairments.
According to our ﬁndings, software designs should accommodate various impairments related
to cancer or its treatment, including chemo brain, visual impairments, and neuropathy/dexterity
impairments. Table 2 lists accessibility guidelines and the impairments they accommodate. The
accessibility guidelines accommodate shortened attention span, memory issues, and lack of fo-
cus, among other challenges, for cancer survivors with chemo brain; diﬃculty seeing content for
cancer survivors with visual impairments; and diﬃculty typing for cancer survivors with physical
impairments. Some accessibility guidelines accommodate more than one impairment. For example,
voice input is important for cancer survivors with either chemo brain or dexterity impairments
Toward Designing Accessible and Meaningful Sofware for Cancer Survivors
15
– the former makes typing harder cognitively, while the latter makes typing harder physically.
Some accessibility guidelines expressed by the participants, such as high contrast between text
and background and zooming function, have been outlined in WCAG 2.2 checklist2 (Contrast and
Resize Text, respectively). The accessibility guidelines to accommodate chemo brain are spelled
out in WCAG to a lesser extent, though many align with accessibility guidelines for neurodiverse
users proposed by Kletenik et al., e.g., allowing users to customize font size and shape, contrast,
and spacing; and clearly explaining instructions and consistent navigation [20].
In addition, we found several design features that are valuable for cancer survivors’ well-being.
(1) Games or gamiﬁcation are favored by cancer survivors to sharpen minds and relieve fatigue.
(2) Features and oﬄine/online communities should be created to support cancer advocacy, an
integral mission for many cancer survivors.
(3) Socialization is important for cancer survivors to share information and exchange support.
(4) Cancer survivors need features such as goal-setting, tracking, reminders, and to-do lists to
support healthy lifestyles regarding exercise, sleep, and nutrition.
(5) Cancer survivors have information needs regarding health, whereas medical professionals
should address cancer-related questions.
Table 2. Accessibility guidelines for cancer survivors.
Accessibility guidelines
Impairment accommodated
Bulleted content
Chemo brain
Highlight key information
Chemo brain
More visuals (pictures/icons), less text
Chemo brain
Simpliﬁed UI design
Chemo brain
Clear and simple instructions
Chemo brain
Avoid too many options
Chemo brain
Easy download and account opening
Chemo brain
Voice output
Chemo brain
Voice input
Chemo brain, Dexterity impairments/Neuropathy
Large font
Chemo brain, Visual impairments
Compatible with computers for larger screens
Visual impairments
High contrast between text and background
Visual impairments
Zooming function
Visual impairments
Gesture input
Dexterity impairments/Neuropathy
Software designers can directly use these accessibility guidelines and design features as the ﬁrst
step toward accessible and beneﬁcial design for cancer survivors. Conducting co-design work-
shops with cancer survivors with various impairments is the ideal way to design accessible and
beneﬁcial apps for this population [3]. Due to time, resource, and expertise constraints, software
designers may consider our accessibility guidelines and design features as well as general accessi-
bility guidelines such as WCAG to meet basic accessibility requirements.
2https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG22/quickref/
16
Kyrie Zhixuan Zhou, Royta B. Ifakher, Sean P. Mullen, Rachel F. Adler, and Devorah Kletenik
5.3
Limitations and Future Work
There are several limitations of this research. First, our sample size is relatively small (n=46 for
the survey study, n=20 for the interview study, and n=10 for the diary study). Nevertheless, we un-
covered software challenges faced by cancer survivors with impairments through in-depth, open-
ended questions and data triangulation. Future research may consider larger-scale surveys to con-
ﬁrm the generalizability of our results. Second, we targeted cancer survivors with impairments
in our recruitment. Future research could understand the software experience of cancer survivors
in general. Third, the eﬀectiveness and usability of the synthesized accessibility guidelines and
design features are unknown. Later, we will seek feedback from cancer app designers, survivors,
oncologists, and researchers to validate the practicality of the guidelines and features, which is
outside the scope of the current study.
6
CONCLUSION
Through a survey, semi-structured interview, and a diary study, we uncovered various software
challenges faced by cancer survivors with impairments. We further synthesized accessibility guide-
lines and design features for software designers to make products more accessible and beneﬁcial for
this population, which was overlooked in the existing computer accessibility and CSCW literature.
With this research, we encourage more researchers and practitioners to consider the accessibility
needs of cancer survivors with impairments when designing software.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
First Author: conceptualization, methodology, data curation, formal analysis, writing – original
draft; Second Author: data curation, formal analysis, writing – original draft; Third Author: con-
ceptualization, methodology, writing – review and editing, supervision; Fourth Author: concep-
tualization, methodology, data curation, writing – review and editing, supervision; Fifth Author:
conceptualization, methodology, data curation, writing – review and editing, project administra-
tion, funding acquisition, supervision.
REFERENCES
[1] Elizabeth A. Ankrah, Arpita Bhattacharya, Lissamarie Donjuan, Franceli L. Cibrian, Lilibeth Torno, Anamara Ritt Ol-
son, Joel Milam, and Gillian Hayes. 2022. When Worlds Collide: Boundary Management of Adolescent and Young
Adult Childhood Cancer Survivors and Caregivers. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. 1–16.
[2] Rachel F Adler, Kevin Baez, Paulina Morales, Jocelyn Sotelo, David Victorson, and Susan Magasi. 2024. Evaluating the
Usability of an mHealth App for Empowering Cancer Survivors With Disabilities: Heuristic Evaluation and Usability
Testing. JMIR Human Factors 11 (2024), e51522.
[3] Rachel F Adler, Paulina Morales, Jocelyn Sotelo, and Susan Magasi. 2022. Developingan mHealth App for Empowering
Cancer Survivors With Disabilities: Co-design Study. JMIR Formative Research 6, 7 (2022), e37706.
[4] Silvana Maria Aﬀonso de Lara, Willian Massami Watanabe, Eduardo Pezutti Beletato dos Santos, and Renata PM
Fortes. 2010. Improving WCAG for elderly web accessibility. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference
on design of communication. 175–182.
[5] Kimberley R Allison, Pandora Patterson, Daniel Guilbert, Melissa Noke, and Olga Husson. 2021. Logging on, reaching
out, and getting by: A review of self-reported Psychosocial impacts of online peer support for people impacted by
cancer. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 5, CSCW1 (2021), 1–35.
[6] Emily Banks, Julie E Byles, Richard E Gibson, Bryan Rodgers, Isabel K Latz, Ian A Robinson, Anna B Williamson, and
Louisa R Jorm. 2010. Is psychological distress in people living with cancer related to the fact of diagnosis, current
treatment or level of disability? Findings from a large Australian study. Medical Journal of Australia 193 (2010),
S62–S67.
[7] WCAG blog. [n. d.].
Digital Accessibility and Neurodiversity: Designing for Our Unique and Varied Brains.
https://wcag.com/blog/digital-accessibility-and-neurodiversity/.
[8] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2012. Thematic analysis. American Psychological Association.
Toward Designing Accessible and Meaningful Sofware for Cancer Survivors
17
[9] AL Cheville, LA Beck, TL Petersen, RS Marks, and GL Gamble. 2009. The detection and treatment of cancer-related
functional problems in an outpatient setting. Supportive Care in Cancer 17 (2009), 61–67.
[10] National Research Council et al. 2005. From cancer patient to cancer survivor: lost in transition. National Academies
Press.
[11] Sharon Watkins Davis and Ingrid Oakley-Girvan. 2017. Achieving value in mobile health applications for cancer
survivors. Journal of Cancer Survivorship 11 (2017), 498–504.
[12] Peter MK de Blank, Michael J Fisher, Lu Lu, Wendy M Leisenring, Kirsten K Ness, Charles A Sklar, Marilyn Stovall,
Chris Vukadinovich, Leslie L Robison, Gregory T Armstrong, et al. 2016. Impact of vision loss among survivors of
childhood central nervous system astroglial tumors. Cancer 122, 5 (2016), 730–739.
[13] Jordan Eschler and Wanda Pratt. 2017. “I’m so glad I met you" Designing Dynamic Collaborative Support for Young
Adult Cancer Survivors. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and
Social Computing. 1763–1774.
[14] James G Gurney, Kirsten K Ness, Joseph Rosenthal, Stephen J Forman, Smita Bhatia, and K Scott Baker. 2006. Vi-
sual, auditory, sensory, and motor impairments in long-term survivors of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
performed in childhood: results from the Bone Marrow Transplant Survivor Study. Cancer: Interdisciplinary Interna-
tional Journal of the American Cancer Society 106, 6 (2006), 1402–1408.
[15] Vicki L Hanson. 2001. Web access for elderly citizens. In Proceedings of the 2001 EC/NSF workshop on Universal
accessibility of ubiquitous computing: providing for the elderly. 14–18.
[16] Andreas Holzinger, Gig Searle, Thomas Kleinberger, Ahmed Seﬀah, and Homa Javahery. 2008. Investigating usability
metrics for the design and development of applications for the elderly. In Computers Helping People with Special Needs:
11th International Conference, ICCHP 2008, Linz, Austria, July 9-11, 2008. Proceedings 11. Springer, 98–105.
[17] Maia Jacobs, James Clawson, and Elizabeth D Mynatt. 2014. Cancer navigation: opportunities and challenges for
facilitating the breast cancer journey. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative
work & social computing. 1467–1478.
[18] Maia Jacobs, Jeremy Johnson, and Elizabeth D Mynatt. 2018. MyPath: Investigating breast cancer patients’ use of
personalized health information. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2, CSCW (2018), 1–21.
[19] Maia L Jacobs, James Clawson, and Elizabeth D Mynatt. 2015. Comparing health information sharing preferences of
cancer patients, doctors, and navigators. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work & Social Computing. 808–818.
[20] Devorah Kletenik, Rachel Minkowitz, Aleksandra Peric, Mehmet Sahin, and Rachel F Adler. 2024. From Awareness to
Action: Teaching Software Accessibility for Neurodiverse Users. In Proceedings of the 55th ACM Technical Symposium
on Computer Science Education V. 1. 687–693.
[21] Susan Magasi, Hilary K Marshall, Cassandra Winters, and David Victorson. 2022. Cancer Survivors’ Disability Expe-
riences and Identities: A Qualitative Exploration to Advance Cancer Equity. International journal of environmental
research and public health 19, 5 (2022), 3112.
[22] Kimberly D Miller, Leticia Nogueira, Theresa Devasia, Angela B Mariotto, K Robin Yabroﬀ, Ahmedin Jemal, Joan
Kramer, and Rebecca L Siegel. 2022. Cancer treatment and survivorship statistics, 2022. CA: a cancer journal for
clinicians 72, 5 (2022), 409–436.
[23] Larissa Nekhlyudov, Grace B Campbell, Kathryn H Schmitz, Gabriel A Brooks, Anita J Kumar, Patricia A Ganz, and
Diane Von Ah. 2022. Cancer-related impairments and functional limitations among long-term cancer survivors: Gaps
and opportunities for clinical practice. Cancer 128, 2 (2022), 222–229.
[24] Robin M Newman, Catherine M Alfano, Mary Vining Radomski, Mackenzi Pergolotti, Timothy J Wolf, Alix G Sleight,
Ashley Leak Bryant, Gerald T Voelbel, Janet S de Moor, Ralph Nitkin, et al. 2019. Catalyzing research to optimize
cancer survivors’ participation in work and life roles. OTJR: occupation, participation and health 39, 4 (2019), 189–196.
[25] Sarah Nikkhah, Swaroop John, Krishna Supradeep Yalamarti, Emily L Mueller, and Andrew D Miller. 2022. Family
Care Coordination in the Children’s Hospital: Phases and Cycles in the Pediatric Cancer Caregiving Journey. Pro-
ceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 6, CSCW2 (2022), 1–30.
[26] Andrew J Saykin, Tim A Ahles, and Brenna C McDonald. 2003. Mechanisms of chemotherapy-induced cognitive
disorders: neuropsychological, pathophysiological, and neuroimaging perspectives. In Seminars in clinical neuropsy-
chiatry, Vol. 8. WB Saunders Company, 201–216.
[27] Kathryn H Schmitz, Rebecca M Speck, Sheree A Rye, Tracey DiSipio, and Sandra C Hayes. 2012. Prevalence of breast
cancer treatment sequelae over 6 years of follow-up: the Pulling Through Study. Cancer 118, S8 (2012), 2217–2225.
[28] Daniel HS Silverman, Christine J Dy, Steven A Castellon, Jasmine Lai, Betty S Pio, Laura Abraham, Kari Waddell,Laura
Petersen, Michael E Phelps, and Patricia A Ganz. 2007. Altered frontocortical, cerebellar, and basal ganglia activity
in adjuvant-treated breast cancer survivors 5–10 years after chemotherapy. Breast cancer research and treatment 103
(2007), 303–311.
18
Kyrie Zhixuan Zhou, Royta B. Ifakher, Sean P. Mullen, Rachel F. Adler, and Devorah Kletenik
[29] Enrique Soto-Perez-de Celis, Can-Lan Sun, William P Tew, Supriya Gupta Mohile, Ajeet Gajra, Heidi D Klepin, Cyn-
thia Owusu, Cary Philip Gross, Hyman B Muss, Stuart M Lichtman, et al. 2018. Association between patient-reported
hearing and visual impairments and functional, psychological, and cognitive status among older adults with cancer.
Cancer 124, 15 (2018), 3249–3256.
[30] Kari Staat and Milena Segatore. 2005. The phenomenon of chemo brain. Clinical journal of oncology nursing 9, 6
(2005), 713.
[31] Kevin D Stein, Karen L Syrjala, and Michael A Andrykowski. 2008. Physical and psychological long-term and late
eﬀects of cancer. Cancer 112, S11 (2008), 2577–2592.
[32] Ellen Stovall, Sheldon Greenﬁeld, and Maria Hewitt. 2005. From cancer patient to cancer survivor: lost in transition.
National Academies Press.
[33] Jina Suh, Spencer Williams, Jesse R Fann, James Fogarty, Amy M Bauer, and Gary Hsieh. 2020. Parallel journeys of
patients with cancer and depression: challenges and opportunities for technology-enabled collaborative care. Pro-
ceedings of the ACM on Human-computer Interaction 4, CSCW1 (2020), 1–36.
[34] Jeﬀrey S Wefel and Sanne B Schagen. 2012. Chemotherapy-related cognitive dysfunction. Current neurology and
neuroscience reports 12 (2012), 267–275.
A
APPENDICES
A.1
Survey Qestions
(1) Email
(2) Gender
(3) Age
(4) Race
(5) Highest level of education
(6) What type of cancer were you diagnosed with? (If you were diagnosed multiple times,
select all.)
• Bladder
• Bone or soft tissue
• Brain
• Breast
• Cervical
• Colorectal
• Eye
• Head and neck
• Kidney
• Leukemia
• Liver
• Lung
• Lymphoma
• Melanoma and related skin cancers
• Myeloma
• Ovarian
• Pancreatic
• Prostate
• Stomach and esophageal
• Testicular
• Thyroid
• Prefer not to say
• Other
(7) What stage of cancer were you ﬁrst diagnosed with?
Toward Designing Accessible and Meaningful Sofware for Cancer Survivors
19
• Stage 1
• Stage 2
• Stage 3
• Stage 4
• I’m not sure
• Prefer not to say
• Other
(8) Current stage of cancer:
• No evidence of disease
• Partial remission
• Complete remission
• Same stage as above
• Cancer has progressed to Stage 2
• Cancer has progressed to Stage 3
• Cancer has progressed to Stage 4
• I’m not sure
• Prefer not to say
• Other
(9) How many years ago were you diagnosed?
(10) Optional comments about diagnosis if you need to clarify anything (including multiple
diagnoses).
(11) What types of treatment did you receive?
• Surgery
• Radiation
• Chemotherapy
• Hormonal treatment
• Other
(12) Prior to your diagnosis, did you experience diﬃculties with any of the following?
• Visual
• Hearing
• Cognitive
• Physical/motor/dexterity
• Anxiety/depression
• Fatigue
• Other
(13) Please explain the nature of these diﬃculties. If you did not have prior to diagnosis, enter
N/A.
(14) After your cancer diagnosis and treatment, did you experience any new diﬃculties in any
of these areas?
• Visual
• Hearing
• Cognitive (including chemo brain)
• Physical/motor/dexterity
• Anxiety/depression
• Fatigue
• Other
(15) Please explain the nature of your (new) diﬃculties. If you do not have any, enter N/A.
20
Kyrie Zhixuan Zhou, Royta B. Ifakher, Sean P. Mullen, Rachel F. Adler, and Devorah Kletenik
(16) If you had a cancer-related impairment, how long did the eﬀects last? (Select for multiple
impairments as necessary and explain in the next question.)
• The impairment is still ongoing.
• I had the impairment for < 6 months.
• I had the impairment for < 1 year.
• I had the impairment for < 2 years.
• I had the impairment for < 3 years.
• I had the impairment for < 4 years.
• I had the impairment for < 5 years.
• I had the impairment for < 10 years.
• I had the impairment for 10 years or more.
• Prefer not to say.
• Other
(17) If you answered for multiple impairments, please explain.
(18) If you had chemotherapy, did you experience the cognitive fog known as “chemo brain"?
If so, please describe how it felt and how long it lasted.
(19) If you had a cancer-related impairment, did it pose any speciﬁc challenges in the use of
software (e.g., websites, apps)? (5-point Likert scale – Never to Very often)
• I had/have diﬃculty reading text on websites/apps (because it is too small or blurry).
• I had/have diﬃculty seeing images/icons on websites/apps.
• I had/have diﬃculty hearing audio on websites/apps/videos/podcasts.
• I had/have diﬃculty typing.
• I had/have diﬃculty manipulating or selecting (e.g., scrolling, zooming, clicking on
buttons) on websites/apps.
• I had/have diﬃculty following the instructions on websites/apps.
• I frequently found/ﬁnd navigating on websites/apps (e.g., ﬁnding the correct option
or page) to be diﬃcult or confusing.
• I was/am frequently distracted or had a hard time focusing while using websites/apps.
• I frequently found/ﬁnd myself frustrated or annoyed while using software, more than
before cancer diagnosis/treatment.
(20) Did you experience any diﬃculties using websites or apps that are not listed above? Please
explain.
(21) Please provide descriptions of the diﬃculties faced while using websites or apps - elaborate
on the choices above.
(22) Which features of website/app design made the use easier?
(23) Which features of website/app design made use more challenging?
(24) Which websites/apps/programs were particularly easy to use? Why?
(25) Which websites/apps/programs were particularly diﬃcult to use? Why?
(26) Were there any strategies, technologies, or tools that you used to mitigate the eﬀects of the
impairments on software use?
(27) Do you have any comments that you’d like to share?
(28) Do you consider the impairments that you experienced as a result of cancer and/or its
treatment to be a “disability"? Please explain your thoughts.
(29) In your experiences with your cancer-related impairment(s), in what ways did you ﬁnd
that technology/software helped with the challenges you faced, and in what ways did tech-
nology/software make them more diﬃcult?
(30) Thank you for completing the survey! Would you be open to further questions, surveys, or
interviews? (Additional compensation would be provided.)
Toward Designing Accessible and Meaningful Sofware for Cancer Survivors
21
A.2
Interview Script
(1) Could you tell me a bit about yourself?
(2) Do you have any impairments as a result of cancer and its treatment?
(a) Can you tell me a little more about it?
(3) What types of technology do you use? (Computer, Laptop, Gaming Consoles, Tablets, etc.)
(a) Is some technology easier to use than others? What makes technology use challeng-
ing?
(4) What software do you often use? (Social media, learning, job search, food delivery, games,
etc.)
(a) For each type of software
(i) What challenges do you experience when using it?
(ii) Could you give me an example?
(iii) What do you think are some possible solutions to these challenges?
(5) Do you use any assistive technology for support when using software? How is it used to
help?
(a) Have you found any techniques to be helpful to you in certain types of software?
(6) Do you feel comfortable asking other people for help if you have diﬃculty accessing/using
software?
(7) What types of games do you play on your mobile device or computer?
(a) Has the type of games you play changed since cancer?
(b) What features made them easy or diﬃcult to play with?
(8) How often do you generally exercise per week?
(a) Has this changed since having cancer?
(b) What kind of software do you think can help you exercise?
(9) Has your social life been impacted by cancer?
(a) If yes, explain how.
(b) What kind of software do you think can help your social life?
(10) What hobbies do you have?
(a) Has this changed since cancer?
(b) What kind of software do you think can support your hobbies?
(11) Is there anything else you would like to tell me that could help my study on accessible
software for cancer survivors?
